8: Introduction to Viruses
Viruses are typically described as obligate intracellular parasites, acellular infectious agents that require the presence of a host
cell in order to multiply. Viruses that have been found to infect all types of cells – humans, animals, plants, bacteria, yeast, archaea,
protozoa…some scientists even claim they have found a virus that infects other viruses! But that is not going to happen without
some cellular help.
Virus Characteristics
Viruses can be extremely simple in design, consisting of nucleic acid surrounded by a protein coat known as a capsid. The capsid is
composed of smaller protein components referred to as capsomers. The capsid+genome combination is called a nucleocapsid.
Viruses can also possess additional components, with the most common being an additional membranous layer that surrounds the
nucleocapsid, called an envelope. The envelope is actually acquired from the nuclear or plasma membrane of the infected host cell,
and then modified with viral proteins called peplomers. Some viruses contain viral enzymes that are necessary for infection of a
host cell and coded for within the viral genome. A complete virus, with all the components needed for host cell infection, is
referred to as a virion.
Virus Characteristics, Image created by Ben Taylor, Public Domain, Via Wikipedia commons
Virus Genome
While cells contain double-stranded DNA for their genome, viruses are not limited to this form. While there are dsDNA viruses,
there are also viruses with single-stranded DNA (ssDNA), double-stranded RNA (dsRNA), and single-stranded RNA (ssRNA). In
this last category, the ssRNA can either positive-sense (+ssRNA, meaning it can transcribe a message, like mRNA) or it can be
negative-sense (-ssRNA, indicating that it is complementary to mRNA). Some viruses even start with one form of nucleic acid in
the nucleocapsid and then convert it to a different form during replication.
Virus Structure 
Viral nucleocapsids come in two basic shapes, although the overall appearance of a virus can be altered by the presence of an
envelope, if present. Helical viruses have an elongated tube-like structure, with the capsomers arranged helically around the coiled
8.1
https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/10660

genome. Icosahedral viruses have a spherical shape, with icosahedral symmetry consisting of 20 triangular faces. The simplest
icosahedral capsid has 3 capsomers per triangular face, resulting in 60 capsomers for the entire virus. Some viruses do not neatly fit
into either of the two previous categories because they are so unusual in design or components, so there is a third category known
as complex viruses. Examples include the poxvirus with a brick-shaped exterior and a complicated internal structure, as well as
bacteriophage with tail fibers attached to an icosahedral head.
Virus Replication Cycle 
While the replication cycle of viruses can vary from virus to virus, there is a general pattern that can be described, consisting of
five steps:
1. Attachment – the virion attaches to the correct host cell.
2. Penetration or Viral Entry – the virus or viral nucleic acid gains entrance into the cell.
3. Synthesis – the viral proteins and nucleic acid copies are manufactured by the cells’ machinery.
4. Assembly – viruses are produced from the viral components.
5. Release – newly formed virions are released from the cell.
Attachment 
Outside of their host cell, viruses are inert or metabolically inactive. Therefore, the encounter of a virion to an appropriate host cell
is a random event. The attachment itself is highly specific, between molecules on the outside of the virus and receptors on the host
cell surface. This accounts for the specificity of viruses to only infect particular cell types or particular hosts.
Penetration or Viral Entry 
Many unenveloped (or naked) viruses inject their nucleic acid into the host cell, leaving an empty capsid on the outside. This
process is termed penetration and is common with bacteriophage, the viruses that infect bacteria. With the eukaryotic viruses, it is
more likely for the entire capsid to gain entrance into the cell, with the capsid being removed in the cytoplasm. An unenveloped
eukaryotic virus often gains entry via endocytosis, where the host cell is compelled to engulf the capsid resulting in an endocytic
vesicle. An enveloped eukaryotic virus gains entrance for its nucleocapsid when the viral envelope fuses with the host cell
membrane, pushing the nucleocapsid past the cell membrane. If the entire nucleocapsid is brought into the cell then there is an
uncoating process to strip away the capsid and release the viral genome.
Synthesis
The synthesis stage is largely dictated by the type of viral genome, since genomes that differ from the cell’s dsDNA genome can
involve intricate viral strategies for genome replication and protein synthesis. Viral specific enzymes, such as RNA-dependent
RNA polymerases, might be necessary for the replication process to proceed. Protein production is tightly controlled, to insure that
components are made at the right time in viral development.
Assembly
The complexity of viral assembly depends upon the virus being made. The simplest virus has a capsid composed of 3 different
types of proteins, which self-assembles with little difficulty. The most complex virus is composed of over 60 different proteins,
which must all come together in a specific order. These viruses often employ multiple assembly lines to create the different viral
structures and then utilize scaffolding proteins to put all the viral components together in an organized fashion.
Release
The majority of viruses lyse their host cell at the end of replication, allowing all the newly formed virions to be released to the
environment. Another possibility, common for enveloped viruses, is budding, where one virus is released from the cell at a time.
The cell membrane is modified by the insertion of viral proteins, with the nucleocapsid pushing out through this modified portion
of the membrane, allowing it to acquire an envelope.
8.2
https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/10660

Active Virus Life Cycle by John Kellogg Via OER at Oregon State University
Bacteriophage 
Viruses that infect bacteria are known as bacteriophage or phage. A virulent phage is one that always lyses the host cell at the end
of replication, after following the five steps of replication described above. This is called the lytic cycle of replication.
There are also temperate phage, viruses that have two options regarding their replication. Option 1 is to mimic a virulent phage,
following the five steps of replication and lysing the host cell at the end, referred to as the lytic cycle. But temperate phage differ
from virulent phage in that they have another choice: Option 2, where they remain within the host cell without destroying it. This
process is known as lysogeny or the lysogenic cycle of replication.
A phage employing lysogeny still undergoes the first two steps of a typical replication cycle, attachment and penetration. Once the
viral DNA has been inserted into the cell it integrates with the host DNA, forming a prophage. The infected bacterium is referred
to as a lysogenor lysogenic bacterium. In this state, the virus enjoys a stable relationship with its host, where it does not interfere
with host cell metabolism or reproduction. The host cell enjoys immunity from reinfection from the same virus.
Exposure of the host cell to stressful conditions (i.e. UV irradiation) causes induction, where the viral DNA excises from the host
cell DNA. This event triggers the remaining steps of the lytic cycle, synthesis, maturation, and release, leading to lysis of the host
cell and release of newly formed virions.
8.3
https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/10660

Lytic Cycle Versus Lysogenic Cycle of Replication. OpenStax, Virus Infections and Hosts. OpenStax CNX. Apr 11, 2013
http://cnx.org/contents/7cbd15ad-5bff-4678-a99f-85fd579e070c@3.
So, what dictates the replication type that will be used by a temperate phage? If there are plenty of host cells around, it is likely that
a temperate phage will engage in the lytic cycle of replication, leading to a large increase in viral production. If host cells are
scarce, a temperate phage is more likely to enter lysogeny, allowing for viral survival until host cell numbers increase. The same is
true if the number of phage in an environment greatly outnumber the host cells, since lysogeny would allow for host cells numbers
to rebound, ensuring long term viral survival.
Lysogens can experience a benefit from lysogeny as well, since it can result in lysogenic conversion, a situation where the
development of a prophage leads to a change in the host’s phenotype. One of the best examples of this is for the bacterium
Corynebacterium diphtheriae, the causative agent of diphtheria. The diphtheria toxin that causes the disease is encoded within the
phage genome, so only C. diphtheriaelysogens cause diphtheria.
8.4
https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/10660

Viral replication: lytic vs lysogenic | Cells | MCAT | Kh…
Eukaryotic Viruses 
Eukaryotic viruses can cause one of four different outcomes for their host cell. The most common outcome is host cell lysis,
resulting from a virulent infection (essentially the lytic cycle of replication seen in phage). Some viruses can cause a latent
infection, co-existing peacefully with their host cells for years (much like a temperate phage during lysogeny). Some enveloped
eukaryotic viruses can also be released one at a time from an infected host cell, in a type of budding process, causing a persistent
infection. Lastly, certain eukaryotic viruses can cause the host cell to transform into a malignant or cancerous cell, a mechanism
known as transformation.
Viruses and Cancer 
There are many different causes of cancer, or unregulated cell growth and reproduction. Some known causes include exposure to
certain chemicals or UV light. There are also certain viruses that have a known associated with the development of cancer. Such
viruses are referred to as oncoviruses. Oncoviruses can cause cancer by producing proteins that bind to host proteins known as
tumor suppressor proteins, which function to regulate cell growth and to initiate programmed cell death, if needed. If the tumor
suppressor proteins are inactivated by viral proteins then cells grow out of control, leading to the development of tumors and
metastasis, where the cells spread throughout the body.
8.5
https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/10660

Key Words
virus, obligate intracellular parasite, capsid, bacteriophage, capsomere, nucleocapsid, envelope, peplomer, virion, dsDNA, ssDNA,
dsRNA, +ssRNA, -ssRNA, helical viruses, icosahedral viruses, complex viruses, attachment, penetration, viral entry, synthesis,
assembly, release, naked virus, endocytosis, budding, bacteriophage, phage, virulent phage, lytic cycle, temperate phage, lysogeny,
lysogenic cycle, prophage, lysogen, lysogenic bacterium, induction, lysogenic conversion, virulent infection, latent infection,
persistent infection, transformation, oncovirus, tumor suppressor proteins.
Essential Questions/Objectives 
1. What are the general properties of a virus?
2. What is the size range of viruses? How do they compare, size-wise, to bacteria?
3. What is the general structure of viruses? What are the different components?
4. What viral shapes exist?
5. How do envelopes and enzymes relate to viruses?
6. What types of viral genomes exist?
7. What are the steps of viral multiplication? What is happening at each step? How do Bacterial/Archaeal viruses differ from
eukaryotic viruses, in regards to multiplication?
8. What are the 2 types of viral infection found in Bacteria/Archaea? What are the specific terms associated with viral infection of
bacterial/archaeal cells?
9. What are the 4 types of viral infection found in eukaryotes?
10. How do some viruses cause cancer?
Exploratory Questions (OPTIONAL)
1. What is the largest bacterium or archaean ever discovered? What is the smallest eukaryote ever discovered?
This page titled 8: Introduction to Viruses is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Linda Bruslind
(Open Oregon State) .
8.6
https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/10660

9: Microbial Growth
Provided with the right conditions (food, correct temperature, etc) microbes can grow very quickly. Depending on the situation, this
could be a good thing for humans (yeast growing in wort to make beer) or a bad thing (bacteria growing in your throat causing
strep throat). It’s important to have knowledge of their growth, so we can predict or control their growth under particular
conditions. While growth for muticelluar organisms is typically measured in terms of the increase in size of a single organism,
microbial growth is measured by the increase in population, either by measuring the increase in cell number or the increase in
overall mass.
Bacterial Division 
Bacteria and archaea reproduce asexually only, while eukartyotic microbes can engage in either sexual or asexual reproduction.
Bacteria and archaea most commonly engage in a process known as binary fission, where a single cell splits into two equally sized
cells. Other, less common processes can include multiple fission, budding, and the production of spores.
The process begins with cell elongation, which requires careful enlargement of the cell membrane and the cell wall, in addition to
an increase in cell volume. The cell starts to replicate its DNA, in preparation for having two copies of its chromosome, one for
each newly formed cell. The protein FtsZ is essential for the formation of a septum, which initially manifests as a ring in the middle
of the elongated cell. After the nucleoids are segregated to each end of the elongated cell, septum formation is completed, dividing
the elongated cell into two equally sized daughter cells. The entire process or cell cyclecan take as little as 20 minutes for an active
culture of E. coli bacteria.
Growth Curve 
Since bacteria are easy to grow in the lab, their growth has been studied extensively. It has been determined that in a closed system
or batch culture (no food added, no wastes removed) bacteria will grow in a predictable pattern, resulting in a growth curve
composed of four distinct phases of growth: the lag phase, the exponential or log phase, the stationary phase, and the death or
decline phase. Additionally, this growth curve can yield generation time for a particular organism – the amount of time it takes for
the population to double.
Bacterial Growth Curve. By Michał Komorniczak. If you use on your website or in your publication my images (either original or
modified), you are requested to give me details: Michał Komorniczak (Poland) or Michal Komorniczak (Poland). For more
information, write to my e-mail address: m.komorniczak.pl@gmail.com [CC BY-SA 3.0], via Wikimedia Commons
The details associated with each growth curve (number of cells, length of each phase, rapidness of growth or death, overall amount
of time) will vary from organism to organism or even with different conditions for the same organism. But the pattern of four
distinct phases of growth will typically remain.
9.1
https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/10667

Lag phase
The lag phase is an adaptation period, where the bacteria are adjusting to their new conditions. The length of the lag phase can
vary considerably, based on how different the conditions are from the conditions that the bacteria came from, as well as the
condition of the bacterial cells themselves. Actively growing cells transferred from one type of media into the same type of media,
with the same environmental conditions, will have the shortest lag period. Damaged cells will have a long lag period, since they
must repair themselves before they can engage in reproduction.
Typically cells in the lag period are synthesizing RNA, enzymes, and essential metabolites that might be missing from their new
environment (such as growth factors or macromolecules), as well as adjusting to environmental changes such as changes in
temperature, pH, or oxygen availability. They can also be undertaking any necessary repair of injured cells.
Exponential or Log phase 
Once cells have accumulated all that they need for growth, they proceed into cell division. The exponential or log phase of growth
is marked by predictable doublings of the population, where 1 cell become 2 cells, becomes 4, becomes 8 etc. Conditions that are
optimal for the cells will result in very rapid growth (and a steeper slope on the growth curve), while less than ideal conditions will
result in slower growth. Cells in the exponential phase of growth are the healthiest and most uniform, which explains why most
experiments utilize cells from this phase.
Bacterial Growth Rates.
Due to the predictability of growth in this phase, this phase can be used to mathematically calculate the time it takes for the
bacterial population to double in number, known as the generation time (g). This information is used by microbiologists in basic
research, as well as in industry. In order to determine generation time, the natural logarithm of cell number can be plotted against
time (where the units can vary, depending upon speed of growth for the particular population), using a semilogarithmic graph to
generate a line with a predictable slope.
The slope of the line is equal to 0.301/g. Alternatively one can rely on the fixed relationship between the initial number of cells at
the start of the exponential phase and the number of cells after some period of time, which can be expressed by:
N = N02n
(9.1)
N
N0
n
where
is the final cell concentration,
is the initial cell concentration, and
is the number of generations that occurred
between the specified period of time.
Generation time (g) can be represented by t/n, with t being the specified period of time in minutes, hours, days, or months. Thus, if
one knows the cell concentration at the start of the exponential phase of growth and the cell concentration after some period of time
of exponential growth, the number of generations can be calculated. Then, using the amount of time that growth was allowed to
proceed (t), one can calculate g.
9.2
https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/10667

Stationary Phase
All good things must come to an end (otherwise bacteria would equal the mass of the Earth in 7 days!). At some point the bacterial
population runs out of an essential nutrient/chemical or its growth is inhibited by its own waste products (it is a closed container,
remember?) or lack of physical space, causing the cells to enter into the stationary phase. At this point the number of new cells
being produced is equal to the number of cells dying off or growth has entirely ceased, resulting in a flattening out of growth on the
growth curve.
Physiologically the cells become quite different at this stage, as they try to adapt to their new starvation conditions. The few new
cells that are produced are smaller in size, with bacilli becoming almost spherical in shape. Their plasma membrane becomes less
fluid and permeable, with more hydrophobic molecules on the surface that promote cell adhesion and aggregation. The nucleoid
condenses and the DNA becomes bound with DNA-binding proteins from starved cells (DPS), to protect the DNA from damage.
The changes are designed to allow the cell to survive for a longer period of time in adverse conditions, while waiting for more
optimal conditions (such as an infusion of nutrients) to occur. These same strategies are used by cells in oligotrophic or low-
nutrient environments. It has been hypothesized that cells in the natural world (i.e. outside of the laboratory) typically exist for long
periods of time in oligotrophic environments, with only sporadic infusions of nutrients that return them to exponential growth for
very brief periods of time.
During the stationary phase cells are also prone to producing secondary metabolites, or metabolites produced after active growth,
such as antibiotics. Cells that are capable of making an endospore will activate the necessary genes during this stage, in order to
initiate the sporulation process.
Death or Decline phase 
In the last phase of the growth curve, the death or decline phase, the number of viable cells decreases in a predictable (or
exponential) fashion. The steepness of the slope corresponds to how fast cells are losing viability. It is thought that the culture
conditions have deteriorated to a point where the cells are irreparably harmed, since cells collected from this phase fail to show
growth when transferred to fresh medium. It is important to note that if the turbidity of a culture is being measured as a way to
determine cell density, measurements might not decrease during this phase, since cells could still be intact.
It has been suggested that the cells thought to be dead might be revived under specific conditions, a condition described as viable
but nonculturable (VBNC). This state might be of importance for pathogens, where they enter a state of very low metabolism and
lack of cellular division, only to resume growth at a later time, when conditions improve.
It has also been shown that 100% cell death is unlikely, for any cell population, as the cells mutate to adapt to their environmental
conditions, however harsh. Often there is a tailing effect observed, where a small population of the cells cannot be killed off. In
addition, these cells might benefit from their death of their fellow cells, which provide nutrients to the environment as they lyse and
release their cellular contents.
Key Words 
binary fission, multiple fission, budding, spores, cell cycle, closed system, batch culture, growth curve, lag phase, exponential or
log phase, generation time (g), N, N0, n, t, stationary phase, DNA-binding proteins from starved cells (DPS), oligotrophic,
secondary metabolites, death or decline phase, viable but nonculturable (VBNC).
Essential Questions/Objectives 
1. How is growth measured in microbial populations?
2. How do eukaryotes and bacteria/archaea differ in their reproductive methods?
3. What are the steps of binary fission? What is happening at each step?
4. Know what the growth curve of an organism grown in a closed system looks like. Know the various stages and what is
occurring at each stage, physiologically. What can influence lag phase? What are the 2 differing explanations for cell loss in the
death or senescence phase?
5. Understand generation time and how can it be determined on a log number of cells vs. time graph. Know the advantage of
plotting the log number of cells vs. time instead of the number of cells vs. time. What factors affect the generation time of an
organism?
6. Practice problem: Six Staphylococcus aureus are inoculated into a cream pie by the hands of a pastry chef. The generation time
of S. aureus in cream pie at room temperature is 30 minutes. a) How many S. aureus are in the pie after 4 hours at RT? b) After
24 hours?
9.3
https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/10667

Exploratory Questions (OPTIONAL) 
1. In what situation would the VBNC occurrence benefit cells? How could this pose a public health threat?
This page titled 9: Microbial Growth is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Linda Bruslind
(Open Oregon State) .
9.4
https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/10667

10: Environmental Factors
Competition is fierce out in the microbial world (non-microbial world, too!) and resources can be scarce. For those microbes that
are willing and able to adapt to what might be considered a harsh environment, it can certainly mean less competition. So what
environmental conditions can affect microbial growth? Temperature, oxygen, pH, water activity, pressure, radiation, lack of
nutrients…these are the primary ones. We will cover more about metabolism (i.e. what type of food can they eat?) later, so let us
focus now on the physical characteristics of the environment and the adaptations of microbes.
Osmolarity 
Cells are subject to changes in osmotic pressure, due to the fact that the plasma membrane is freely permeable to water (a process
known as passive diffusion). Water will generally move in the direction necessary to try and equilibrate the cell’s solute
concentration to the solute concentration of the surrounding environment. If the solute concentration of the environment is lower
than the solute concentration found inside the cell, the environment is said to be hypotonic. In this situation water will pass into the
cell, causing the cell to swell and increasing internal pressure. If the situation is not rectified then the cell will eventually burst from
lysis of the plasma membrane. Conversely, if the solute concentration of the environment is higher than the solute concentration
found inside the cell, the environment is said to be hypertonic. In this situation water will leave the cell, causing the cell to
dehydrate. Extended periods of dehydration will cause permanent damage to the plasma membrane.
Hypertonic vs. Hypotonic Solutions.
Cells in a hypotonic solution need to reduce the osmotic concentration of their cytoplasm. Sometimes cells can use inclusions to
chemically change their solutes, reducing molarity. In a real pinch they can utilize what are known as mechanosensitive (MS)
channels, located in their plasma membrane. MS channels open as the plasma membrane stretches due to the increased pressure,
allowing solutes to leave the cell and thus lowering the osmotic pressure.
Cells in a hypertonic solution needing to increase the osmotic concentration of their cytoplasm can take up additional solutes from
the environment. However, cells have to be careful about what solutes they take up, since some solutes can interfere with cellular
function and metabolism. Cells need to take up compatible solutes, such as sugars or amino acids, which typically will not
interfere with cellular processes.
There are some microbes that have evolved to extreme hypertonic environments, specifically high salt concentrations, to the point
where they now require the presence of high levels of sodium chloride to grow. Halophiles, which require a NaCl concentration
above 0.2 M, take in both potassium and chloride ions as a way to offset the effects of the hypertonic environment that they live in.
Their evolution has been so complete that their cellular components (ribosomes, enzymes, transport proteins, cell wall, plasma
membrane) now require the presence of high concentrations of both potassium and chloride to function.
pH 
pH is defined as the negative logarithm of the hydrogen ion concentration of a solution, expressed in molarity. The pH scale ranges
from 0 to 14, with 0 representing an extremely acidic solution (1.0 M H+) and 14 representing an extremely alkaline solution (1.0 x
10-14 M H+). Each pH units represents a tenfold change in hydrogen ion concentration, meaning a solution with a pH of 3 is 10x
more acidic than a solution with a pH of 4.
Typically cells would prefer a pH that is similar to their internal environment, with cytoplasm having a pH of 7.2. That means that
most microbes are neutrophiles (“neutral lovers”), preferring a pH in the range of 5.5 to 8.0. There are some microbes, however,
10.1
https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/10674

