22: The Viruses
Viral Classification 
Since viruses lack ribosomes (and thus rRNA), they cannot be classified within the Three Domain Classification scheme with
cellular organisms. Alternatively, Dr. David Baltimore derived a viral classification scheme, one that focuses on the relationship
between a viral genome to how it produces its mRNA. The Baltimore Scheme recognizes seven classes of viruses.
DNA viruses
Class I: dsDNA 
DNA viruses with a dsDNA genome, like bacteriophages T4 and lambda, have a genome exactly the same as the host cell that they
are infecting. For this reason, many host enzymes can be utilized for replication and/or protein production. The flow of information
follows a conventional pathway: dsDNA → mRNA → protein, with a DNA-dependent RNA-polymerase producing the mRNA
and the host ribosome producing the protein. The genome replication, dsDNA → dsDNA, requires a DNA-dependent DNA-
polymerase from either the virus or the host cell.
22.1
https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/10760

dsDNA.
The virus often employs strategies for control of gene expression, to insure that particular viral products are made at specific times
in the virus replication. In the case of T4, the host RNA polymerase binds to the viral DNA and begins transcribing early genes
immediately after the DNA is injected into the cell. One of the early viral proteins modifies the host RNA polymerase so that it will
no longer recognize host promoters at all, in addition to moving on to transcribe genes for middle-stage viral proteins. A further
modification (catalyzed by middle-stage viral proteins) further modified the RNA polymerase so it will recognize viral genes
coding for late-stage proteins. This insures an orderly production of viral proteins.
The replication of several dsDNA viruses results in the production of concatemers, where several viral genomes are linked
together due to short single-stranded regions with terminal repeats. As the genome is packaged into the capsid a viral endonuclease
cuts the concatemer to an appropriate length.
There are several animal viruses with dsDNA genomes, such as the pox viruses and the adenoviruses. The herpesviruses have
several notable features, such as the link of several members with cancer and the ability of the viruses to remain in a latent form
within their host. A productive infection results in an explosive viral population, cell death, and development of disease signs,
22.2
https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/10760

during which neurons are infected. A latent infection develops in the neurons, allowing the virus to remain undetected in the host.
If the viral genome is reactivated, a productive infection results, leading to viral replication and disease signs again.
Class II: ssDNA 
The flow of information for ssDNA viruses, such as the parvoviruses, will still follow the conventional pathway, to a certain extent:
DNA → mRNA → protein. But the viral genome can either have the same base sequence as the mRNA (plus-strand DNA) or be
complementary to the mRNA (minus-strand DNA). In the former case, a DNA strand that is complementary to the viral genome
must be manufactured first, forming a double-stranded replicative form (RF). This can be used to both manufacture viral proteins
and as a template for viral genome copies. For the minus-strand DNA viruses, the genome can be used directly to produce mRNA
but a complementary copy will still need to be made, to serve as a template for viral genome copies.
ssDNA.
The replicative form can be used for rolling-circle replication, where one strand is nicked and replication enzymes are used to
extend the free 3’ end. As a complementary strand is synthesized around the circular DNA, the 5’ end is peeled off, leading to a
displaced strand that continues to grow in length.
22.3
https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/10760

Rolling-Circle Replication.
Class VII: DNA viruses that use reverse transcriptase 
The hepadnaviruses contain a DNA genome that is partially double-stranded, but contains a single-stranded region. After gaining
entrance into the cell’s nucleus, host cell enzymes are used to fill in the gap with complementary bases to form a dsDNA closed
loop. Gene transcription yields a plus-strand RNA known as the pregenome, as well as the viral enzyme reverse transcriptase, an
RNA-dependent DNA-polymerase. The pregenome is used as a template for the reverse transcriptase to produced minus-strand
DNA genomes, with a small piece of pregenome used as a primer to produce the double-stranded region of the genomes.
RNA viruses 
Class III: dsRNA
Double-stranded RNA viruses infect bacteria, fungi, plants, and animals, such as the rotavirus that causes diarrheal illness in
humans. But cells do not utilize dsRNA in any of their processes and have systems in place to destroy any dsRNA found in the cell.
Thus the viral genome, in its dsRNA form, must be hidden or protected from the cell enzymes. Cells also lack RNA-dependent
RNA-polymerases, necessary for replication of the viral genome so the virus must provide this enzyme itself. The viral RNA-
dependent RNA polymerase acts as both a transcriptase to transcribe mRNA, as well as a replicase to replicate the RNA genome.
22.4
https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/10760

dsRNA.
For the rotavirus, the viral nucleocapsid remains intact in the cytoplasm with replication events occurring inside, allowing the
dsRNA to remain protected. Messenger RNA is transcribed from the minus-strand of the RNA genome and then translated by the
host ribosome in the cytoplasm. Viral proteins aggregate to form new nucleocapsids around RNA replicase and plus-strand RNA.
The minus-strand RNA is then synthesized by the RNA replicase within the nucleocapsid, once again insuring protection of the
dsRNA genome.
Class IV: +ssRNA 
Viruses with plus-strand RNA, such as poliovirus, can use their genome directly as mRNA with translation by the host ribosome
occurring as soon as the unsegmented viral genome gains entry into the cell. One of the viral genes expressed yields an RNA-
dependent RNA-polymerase (or RNA replicase), which creates minus-strand RNA from the plus-strand genome. The minus-strand
RNA can be used as a template for more plus-strand RNA, which can be used as mRNA or as genomes for the newly forming
viruses.
22.5
https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/10760

+ssRNA.
Translation of the poliovirus genome yields a polyprotein, a large protein with protease activity that cleaves itself into three
smaller proteins. Additional cleavage activity eventually yields all the proteins needed for capsid formation, as well as an RNA-
dependent RNA-polymerase.
The formation of a polyprotein that is cut into several smaller proteins illustrates one possible strategy to an issue faced by many
+ssRNA viruses – how to generate multiple proteins from an unsegmented +ssRNA genome? Other possibilities include:
subgenomic mRNA – during translation, portions of the viral RNA may be skipped, resulting in different proteins than what is
made from the viral RNA in its entirety.
ribosomal frame-shifting – the ribosome “reads” the mRNA in groups of three nucleotides or codon, which translate to one
amino acid. If the ribosome starts with nucleotide #1, that is one open reading frame (ORF), resulting in one set of amino
acids. If the ribosome were to move forward where nucleotide 2 is the starting nucleotide that would be ORF #2, resulting in a
completely different set of amino acids. If the ribosome were to move forward again where nucleotide 3 is the starting
nucleotide that would be ORF#3, resulting in an entirely different set of amino acids. Some viruses have viral genes that
deliberately overlap within different ORFs, leading to the production of different proteins from a single mRNA.
readthrough mechanism – a viral genome can have stop codons embedded throughout the sequence. When the ribosome
comes to a stop codon it can either stop, ending the amino acid sequence, or it can ignore the stop codon, continuing on to
make a longer string of amino acids. For viruses with the readthrough mechanism, they acquire a variety of proteins by having
stop codons that are periodically ignored. Sometimes this function is combined with the ribosomal frame-shifting to produce an
even greater variety of viral proteins.
Class V: -ssRNA 
Minus-strand RNA viruses include many members notable for humans, such as influenza virus, rabies virus, and Ebola virus. Since
the genome of minus-strand RNA viruses cannot be used directly as mRNA, the virus must carry an RNA-dependent RNA-
polymerase within its capsid. Upon entrance into the host cell, the plus-strand RNAs generated by the polymerase are used as
mRNA for protein production. When viral genomes are needed the plus-strand RNAs are used as templates to make minus-strand
RNA.
22.6
https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/10760

-ssRNA.
Class VI: +ssRNA, retroviruses
Despite the fact that the retroviral genome is composed of +ssRNA, it is not used as mRNA. Instead, the virus uses its reverse
transcriptase to synthesize a piece of ssDNA complementary to the viral genome. The reverse transcriptase also possesses
ribonuclease activity, which is used to degrade the RNA strand of the RNA-DNA hybrid. Lastly, the reverse transcriptase is used
as a DNA polymerase to make a complementary copy to the ssDNA, yielding a dsDNA molecule. This allows the virus to insert its
genome, in a dsDNA form, into the host chromosome, forming a provirus. Unlike a prophage, a provirus can remain latent
indefinitely or cause the expression of viral genes, leading to the production of new viruses. Excision of the provirus does not occur
for gene expression.
22.7
https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/10760

+ssRNA, retroviruses.
Other Infectious Agents 
Viroids 
Viroids are small, circular ssRNA molecules that lack protein. These infectious molecules are associated with a number of plant
diseases. Since ssRNA is highly susceptible to enzymatic degradation, the viroid RNA has extensive complementary base pairing,
causing the viroid to take on a hairpin configuration that is resistant to enzymes. For replication viroids rely on a plant RNA
polymerase with RNA replicase activity.
Prions 
Prions are infectious agents that completely lack nucleic acid of any kind, being made entirely of protein. They are associated with
a variety of diseases, primarily in animals, although a prion has been found that infects yeast (!). Diseases include bovine
spongiform encephalopathy (BSE or “mad cow disease”), Creutzfeld-Jakob disease in humans, and scrapie in sheep.
The prion protein is found in the neurons of healthy animals (PrPC or Prion Protein Cellular), with a particular secondary
structure. The pathogenic form (PrPSC or Prion Protein Scrapie) has a different secondary structure and is capable of converting
the PrPC into the pathogenic form. Accumulation of the pathogenic form causes destruction of brain and nervous tissue, leading to
disease symptoms such as memory loss, lack of coordination, and eventually death.
22.8
https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/10760

Prions. Joannamasel at English Wikipedia [CC BY-SA 3.0], via Wikimedia Commons
Key Words 
Baltimore Scheme, Class I, Class II, Class III, Class IV, Class V, Class VI, Class VII, DNA-dependent RNA polymerase, DNA-
dependent DNA-polymerase, concatemer, productive infection, latent infection, plus-strand DNA/+DNA, minus-strand DNA/-
DNA, dsDNA, ssDNA, replicative form (RF), rolling-circle replication, pregenome, reverse transcriptase, RNA-dependent DNA-
polymerase, dsRNA, RNA-dependent RNA-polymerase, transcriptase, replicase, plus-strand RNA/+ssRNA, minus-strand RNA/-
ssRNA, polyprotein, subgenomic mRNA, ribosomal frame-shifting, open reading frame (ORF), readthrough mechanism, stop
codon, retrovirus, ribonuclease, provirus, viroid, prion, PrPC/Prion Protein Cellular, PrPSC/Prion Protein Scrapie.
Essential Questions/Objectives 
1. What is the Baltimore system of classification? What viral characteristics does it use?How does each viral group make proteins
and replicate their genome? Where do the necessary components come from? (virus or host cell) What modifications are
necessary, for viruses with a genome different from the host cell?
2. What strategy do dsDNA viruses use for control of gene expression? What are concatemers? What are productive and latent
infections?
3. What is a replicative form? What is rolling circle replication? What is the advantage of these viral mechanisms?
4. What is a pregenome? What is reverse transcriptase? What role does it play for the Class VII viruses?
5. What issues do dsRNA viruses face? How do they overcome these issues? What is a transcriptase? What is a replicase?
6. How is the genome used by Class IV +ssRNA viruses? What are the strategies used by these viruses to generate multiple
proteins from an unsegmented genome?
7. What steps are necessary for the –ssRNA viruses?
8. How do the retroviruses, as +ssRNA viruses, differ from the Class IV viruses? What is a ribonuclease? What is a provirus?
9. What is a viroid? What is a prion? How do these agents cause disease? How do they replicate?
Exploratory Questions (OPTIONAL) 
1. Why were scientists initially so resistant to the idea of prions lacking any type of nucleic acid?
This page titled 22: The Viruses is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Linda Bruslind (Open
Oregon State) .
22.9
https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/10760

