ISSUE 
No.1
February-March 2019
Health&
      Medicine
Plus:
Generation
Ketamine
A SILENT 
DISEASE ON 
THE RISE
THE PARTY DRUG IS 
INSPIRING A NEW ERA OF 
DEPRESSION TREATMENTS.  
BUT IS THERE MORE  
TO THE STORY?
NEW 
CONNECTIONS 
BETWEEN THE 
GUT AND BRAIN
WITH COVERAGE FROM
YOUR HEALTH 
INSURANCE 
MAY BE 
PUTTING YOU 
IN DANGER

FROM  
THE 
EDITOR
Health&
      Medicine
Your Opinion  
Matters!
Help shape the future  
of this digital magazine.  
Let us know what you  
think of the stories within 
these pages by emailing us: 
editors@sciam.com. 
LIZ TORMES
New Frontiers in Health and Medicine 
On the Cover
At the end of last year, Chinese geneticist He Jiankui shocked the world by announcing that he had successfully altered the genes 
of twin baby girls to prevent them from ever contracting HIV. The research community’s response was quick and harsh: he had 
flouted the ethical guidelines for manipulating the genomes of embryos, it said, and seemed unaware of the Pandora’s box he had 
pried open. While this one rogue scientist’s activities (if found to be true) have the potential to bruise public opinion of new, power-
ful medical technology, the promise of the technique, CRISPR-Cas 9 gene editing, is undeniable: the potential to block diseases 
with an underlying genetic basis before they begin, literally editing them out of the human genome for generations to come. The 
science and medical community will have a lot of talking to do in the coming years about how to manage this new technology and 
what impacts we can expect to see on human health.  
And this isn’t the only health and medicine issue worth digging into. An unrelenting opioid crisis continues to sweep through the 
U.S., as do reemerging diseases and surprising epidemics. The medical community has rallied around new technologies—im-
mune-based treatments for cancers, for example, and revolutionary genetic technology, such as CRISPR. Unanswered questions 
remain about the potential of medical marijuana, the relation between the gut and the brain, and the true scientific value of the 
latest wellness trends. And that’s just scratching the surface. 
It seems prime time for Scientific American to contribute to the conversation in a more substantial way. Therefore, I am thrilled to 
introduce our newest subscription product: Scientific American Health&Medicine. This bimonthly publication will include articles 
from Scientific American and Nature and will explore the cutting-edge science of everything from human health and epidemiology 
to biotechnology and medicine. It’s just what the doctor ordered. 
As always we are eager for your feedback! Send us your thoughts at editors@sciam.com
The party drug is inspiring a 
new era of depression 
treatments. But is there 
more to the story?
CHRIS GASH
Andrea Gawrylewski
Collections Editor
2

February-March 2019
Volume 1 • No. 1
WHAT’S  
INSIDE
GETTY IMAGES
STEVE GSCHMEISSNER GETTY IMAGES
FEATURES
15.
Generation  
Ketamine
Johnson & Johnson  
has submitted its esket-
amine for regulatory 
approval, but researchers 
still don’t understand  
how the fast-acting 
antidepressant lifts 
moods
19.
The Silent Epidemic 
Killing More People 
Than HIV, Malaria  
or TB
Viral hepatitis is on the 
rise. Tackling hepatitis B 
in Africa is key to  
fighting back
25. 
Model  
Citizens
How digital drug  
dealers and virtual users 
are providing clues to 
help stop the U.S.  
opioid epidemic
11.
Too Good to Be True? 
A Nonaddictive 
Opioid without Lethal 
Side Effects Shows 
Promise
A still-experimental drug 
demonstrates the 
qualities of an ideal 
painkiller in a test in 
monkeys
12.
The Biology of 
Sugars Points to  
a Sweet Strategy  
for Treating  
Cancer
Long-ignored field 
attracts interest from 
companies trying to 
develop next-generation 
immune therapies
OPINION
30.  
Has Your Health Insurance Really  
Got You Covered?
When it comes to making sure patients take their 
medications as prescribed, the answer is no
32.
Why Doctors Reject Tools That Make  
Their Jobs Easier
From the thermometer’s invention onward, physi-
cians have feared—incorrectly—that new technology 
would make their jobs obsolete
35.  
Viruses on a Plane: What Emirates  
Flight EK203 Teaches Us
We’re good at responding to suspected disease 
outbreaks, but we’re in danger of letting down  
our guard
37.
Addressing Cultural Bias in Medicine
We must overcome our inherent prejudices if we 
want to offer the best health care for all
NEWS
4.
How Marijuana Use 
during Pregnancy 
Could Harm a 
Developing Baby’s 
Brain
Three studies in rodents 
suggest prenatal 
exposure to the drug 
may pose risks for 
infants
6.
How Might the 
Appendix Play a Key 
Role in Parkinson’s 
Disease?
Those who’ve had it 
removed get the 
neurodegenerative 
disorder later or not at 
all, study finds
7.
A New Connection 
between the Gut and 
Brain
A surprising way that diet 
leads risks of stroke and 
cognitive impairment
8. 
What Do Americans 
Think about Food 
Additives and GMOs?
About half think they’re 
unhealthy; the other half 
aren’t especially 
concerned
3

NEWS
How Marijuana 
Harms a Developing 
Baby’s Brain
Three studies in rodents suggest 
prenatal exposure to the drug may 
pose risks for infants
GETTY IMAGES
MARIJUANA HAS BEEN legalized in 
some capacity in 31 U.S. states, in 
large part due to a softening stance 
around the potential harms of the 
drug and recognition of its medical 
benefits. As a result, cannabis has 
become the most commonly used 
illicit drug during pregnancy.
One recent study revealed that in 
2016 7 percent of pregnant women 
in California used marijuana, with 
rates as high as 22 percent among 
teenage mothers. In Colorado 69 
percent of dispensaries recommend-
ed the drug to pregnant women to 
help with morning sickness.
Whereas marijuana is not a major 
health risk for most adults, prenatal 
drug exposure can be harmful to 
unborn babies. Previous research 
has shown infants exposed to 
cannabis in the womb are 50 
percent more likely to have a lower 
birth weight. Now three new studies 
presented last November at the 
Society for Neuroscience annual 
meeting in San Diego suggest 
prenatal cannabis exposure—at least 
in rodents—could have serious 
consequences for fetal brain devel-
opment. “There’s become this 
relaxation—in part because [marijua-
na] is becoming legal in many states 
around the country—that it’s fine,” 
says Yasmin Hurd, who is director  
of the Addiction Institute at the 
Icahn School of Medicine at Mount 
Sinai and was not involved in the 
new research. But, she adds, just 
because a drug is not very danger-
ous to adults does not mean it is 
harmless to the developing brain.
In one study researchers at 
Washington State University in 
Pullman showed rat pups born to 
mothers exposed to high amounts  
of cannabis vapor during 
pregnancy had trouble 
with cognitive flexibility. 
Twice a day the scien-
tists filled the pregnant 
rats’ containers with 
4

NEWS
“Given that more 
pregnant women 
today are starting to 
smoke marijuana, 
it’s really important 
for us to get that 
word out.” 
—Yasmin Hurd
implicated in cognitive impairments 
in both people and animals.
“We think that prenatal marijuana 
exposure can induce an increase in 
kynurenic acid, and this may be 
responsible for the cognitive impair-
ment observed in the offspring of 
marijuana users,” says Sarah Beg-
giato, a postdoctoral researcher at 
the University of Ferrara in Italy and 
co-author of the study. “Why is 
glutamate going down? It’s because 
kynurenic acid is going up.” The 
scientists are now researching drugs 
that block the acid’s synthesis, which 
may help defend against the prob-
lems associated with prenatal 
cannabis exposure.
The findings, which are in rodents, 
may not necessarily translate to 
humans. Mount Sinai’s Hurd, who 
has been researching the effects of 
marijuana on the developing brain in 
both humans and animals for 15 
years, says the new studies do not 
reveal anything “shockingly new.” 
But they show “that there are indeed 
multiple systems being affected,” she 
says, “and given that more pregnant 
women today are starting to smoke 
marijuana, it’s really important for us 
to get that word out.”
—Dana G. Smith 
marijuana vapor from an e-cigarette, 
elevating levels of the psychoactive 
chemical THC (tetrahydrocannabi-
nol) in the rats’ blood to roughly the 
human equivalent of smoking a joint. 
After the pups grew up the research-
ers trained them on a task that 
measured their ability to think flexibly 
and learn new rules. The young rats 
first learned to follow a light cue to 
push one of two levers in order to 
receive a sugary treat. The next day, 
pushing only the left lever would 
deliver the reward, regardless of 
which side the light had been on.
The rats exposed to cannabis in 
utero learned the first rule (following 
the light cue) without a problem, but 
they took significantly longer to 
learn the new rule (pushing the left 
lever) than did rats not exposed to 
the drug. The cannabis-exposed rats 
also made many more mistakes on 
the second day. They would respond 
correctly for a couple rounds, 
making it seem like they knew the 
new rule, but then they would press 
the wrong lever again. “It was like 
something wasn’t really clicking with 
them,” says Ryan McLaughlin, an 
assistant professor of integrative 
physiology and neuroscience at 
Washington State and lead author of   
the study, which has not yet been 
published. He says they never got 
that “‘Aha!’ moment, where it’s like, 
‘Oh, this is what I’m supposed to do.’”
In a similar study, scientists at 
Auburn University in Alabama found 
rats born to mothers that had been 
injected with a low, continuous dose 
of synthetic cannabis during preg-
nancy were significantly impaired on 
several different memory tasks 
involving mazes. “The rats that were 
exposed to cannabinoids [chemicals 
like those found in marijuana] prena-
tally were performing less efficiently 
than the control rats” that were not 
exposed, says Priyanka Pinky, a 
graduate student at Auburn who 
conducted the research. “There was 
a gap in the acquisition of the 
memory and the consolidation of the 
memory.”
The young rats whose mothers 
were dosed with the drug also had 
abnormalities in the hippocampus, 
the brain’s primary memory center. 
Specifically, they had difficulty 
creating new connections between 
neurons—the basis for forming new 
memories. The researchers think the 
differences in the hippocampus 
stem from changes in levels of 
glutamate, the brain’s main excitato-
ry neurochemical involved in learn-
ing and memory.
In the third study researchers at 
the University of Maryland School of 
Medicine and the University of 
Ferrara again found impairments in 
memory and changes in levels of 
glutamate in the brains of rats 
exposed to THC in the womb. They 
also discovered an increase in 
another molecule in the brain, which 
they think may be the missing link 
between prenatal cannabis expo-
sure, glutamate and cognitive 
impairments: kynurenic acid. This 
chemical acts like a puppet master 
in the brain, regulating glutamate 
and other important neurochemicals; 
high levels of the molecule result in 
lower glutamate levels. Kynurenic 
acid has also previously been 
5

NEWS
How Might the 
Appendix Play a Key 
Role in Parkinson’s 
Disease?
Those who’ve had it removed get 
the neurodegenerative disorder  
later or not at all, study finds
GETTY IMAGES
MOST PEOPLE FORGET they even 
have an appendix unless it bursts or 
becomes inflamed, but a new study 
suggests the organ may play a key 
role in the development of Parkin-
son’s disease. Those who have their 
appendixes removed in young adult-
hood run a nearly 20 percent lower 
risk of developing Parkinson’s de-
cades later, according to a study pub-
lished last October in Science Trans-
lational Medicine.
The new finding helps solidify the 
developing view Parkinson’s is not 
just a motor disorder characterized by 
tremors, stiffness and imbalanced 
walking—but a whole-body condition 
that often involves the digestive 
system, says lead author Viviane 
Labrie, an assistant professor at the 
Van Andel Research Institute’s Center 
for Neurodegenerative Science. The 
appendix is attached to the large 
intestine and houses gut bacteria, she 
notes. The fingerlike pouch of tissue, 
which used to be considered a 
useless vestige of our evolutionary 
past, is now believed to play an 
important role in immune function—
particularly early in life. It is not yet 
known what initiates Parkinson’s, 
although a growing body of research 
suggests inflammation plays a key 
role, Labrie and others say.
The multipart study looked at a 
database of 1.6 million people in 
Sweden and found a lower risk of 
Parkinson’s among those whose 
appendixes had been removed, 
co-author Lena Brundin said in a 
news conference. She added that the 
difference was particularly pro-
nounced among people living in rural 
parts of the country—potential 
reasons for this remain unclear, 
although pesticide exposure has 
been shown to be linked to Parkin-
son’s, says Brundin, an associate 
professor at Van Andel, an indepen-
dent research and science education 
organization in Grand Rapids, Mich.
The researchers also looked at a 
much-smaller database of about 850 
people whose Parkinson’s has been 
carefully followed, and found those 
who had undergone appendectomies 
developed the disease 3.6 years later 
on average than those who still had 
an appendix. They also found the 
protein alpha-synuclein, which is 
misshapen in Parkinson’s patients, in 
the appendixes of 48 out of 50 
healthy people—suggesting the 
protein may play a useful (but still 
unknown) function there. Patrik 
Brundin, who is associate director of 
research at Van Andel and director of 
its Neurodegenerative Science center, 
says he was surprised to find so much 
alpha-synuclein in healthy people, and 
also that the protein was equally 
abundant in both old and young study 
subjects. “Those are all, for boring 
scientists like us, sufficiently surpris-
ing to make us excited,” he says.
According to Labrie, deformed 
clumps of alpha-synuclein might 
travel up the vagus nerve, which 
connects the digestive system to the 
brain, and then seed the brain with 
this destructive protein. Clumps of it 
are thought to block the production of 
the chemical dopamine, causing the 
tremors and stiffness that define 
Parkinson’s.
Ole Isacson, a professor of neurolo-
gy at Harvard Medical School who 
was not involved in the research, has 
a different view. He believes removing 
6

NEWS
A New Connection 
between the Gut  
and Brain
A surprising way that diet  
leads risks of stroke and  
cognitive impairment
GETTY IMAGES
Many people who develop Parkin-
son’s suffer earlier in their lives from 
constipation, loss of smell, low blood 
pressure and sleep disorders such as 
acting out their dreams, says Rachel 
Dolhun, a movement disorder special-
ist and vice president of medical 
communications for the Michael J. 
Fox Foundation, which supports 
Parkinson’s research. People should 
not be concerned if they have 
occasional constipation in midlife, she 
notes, but a constellation of these 
symptoms may mean someone is at 
higher risk for developing the disor-
der. She hopes people will eventually 
be able to get risk scores early 
enough to let them to make lifestyle 
or medication changes in attempt to 
prevent the disease, she says.
Both Dolhun and Labrie say 
people should not get their appen-
dixes removed because of the new 
findings. A study like this can only 
identify an association—not a clear 
cause-and-effect relationship 
between appendix removal and 
reduced risk of Parkinson’s. “You 
wouldn’t want anybody to run out 
and get their appendix taken out 
just because that might lower their 
risk of Parkinson’s,” Dolhun says.
—Karen Weintraub
the appendix may help prevent or 
delay Parkinson’s by blocking inflam-
mation, which he sees as the true bad 
actor. Inflammatory bowel disease 
and inflammation of the gut have 
been linked to Parkinson’s, and one 
recent study found treating inflamma-
tory bowel disease patients with an 
anti-inflammatory called anti-tumor 
necrosis factor reduced their likeli-
hood of developing Parkinson’s by 
nearly 80 percent. There are many 
causes of Parkinson’s, says Isacson, 
who also directs the Neuroregenera-
tion Laboratories and Neuroregener-
ation Research Institute at McLean 
Hospital. But he notes “maybe half or 
more of the patients with Parkinson’s 
disease have had some kind of 
inflammatory condition that has 
accelerated that pathology.”
Malú Tansey, a professor of physiol-
ogy at Emory University who did not 
take part of the study, agrees 
research into the connection be-
tween inflammation and Parkinson’s 
might eventually lead the way to 
treatments and better diagnosis. She 
says it is possible that avoiding 
inflammation in the gut—through 
good diet and exercise, medications 
or probiotics—might be protective 
against Parkinson’s.
IT IS WELL KNOWN that a high salt 
diet leads to high blood pressure, a 
risk factor for an array of health 
problems, including heart disease 
and stroke. But over the last decade, 
studies across human populations 
have reported the association be-
tween salt intake and stroke irre-
spective of high blood pressure and 
risk of heart disease, suggesting a 
missing link between salt intake and 
brain health.
Interestingly, there is a growing 
body of work showing that there is 
communication between the gut and 
brain, now commonly dubbed the 
gut-brain axis. The disruption of the 
gut-brain axis contributes to a 
diverse range of diseases, including 
Parkinson’s disease and irritable 
bowel syndrome. Consequently, the 
7

NEWS
What Do Americans 
Think about  
Food Additives  
and GMOs?
About half think they’re  
unhealthy; the other half aren’t 
especially concerned
gut and targets the brain’s blood 
vessels to, ultimately, affect cognitive 
function. When the mice were 
returned to a normal diet after being 
on a high salt diet, the detrimental 
health effects caused by excess salt 
intake were erased. A pharmacologi-
cal intervention that disrupted the 
immune signals also reversed the 
effects.
The implications of this newly 
identified gut-brain connection extend 
to several autoimmune disorders, 
including multiple sclerosis, rheuma-
toid arthritis, psoriasis, and inflam-
matory bowel disease, that have 
been shown to activate the same 
immune signaling pathway implicat-
ed in this study. These autoimmune 
disorders have a high stroke risk 
and are linked to poorly functioning 
blood vessels in the nervous system. 
This research is also a demonstra-
tion that what we eat affects how 
we think, and that seemingly isolat-
ed parts of the body can play vital 
roles in brain health. These results 
motivate research on how everyday 
stressors to our digestive systems 
and blood vessels might change the 
brain and, consequently, how we see, 
and experience, the world.  
—Jonathan D. Grinstein 
developing field of gut-brain axis 
research is rapidly growing and evolv-
ing. Five years ago, a couple of 
studies showed that high salt intake 
leads to profound immune changes 
in the gut, resulting in increased 
vulnerability of the brain to autoim-
munity—when the immune system 
attacks its own healthy cells and 
tissues by mistake, suggesting that 
perhaps the gut can communicate 
with the brain via immune signaling.
Now, new research shows another 
connection: immune signals sent from 
the gut can compromise the brain’s 
blood vessels, leading to deteriorated 
brain heath and cognitive impairment. 
Surprisingly, the research unveils a 
previously undescribed gut-brain 
connection mediated by the immune 
system and indicates that excessive 
salt might negatively impact brain 
health in humans through impairing 
the brain’s blood vessels regardless 
of its effect on blood pressure.
This research proposes new 
therapeutic targets for countering 
stroke—the second leading cause of 
death worldwide—and cognitive 
dysfunction. Reducing salt intake is 
applicable to people around the 
globe, as nearly every adult con-
sumes too much salt: on average  
9 to12 grams per day or around 
twice the recommended maximum 
level of intake (5 grams) by the World 
Health Organization.
The researchers used mice, and 
found that immune responses in the 
small intestines set off a cascade of 
chemical responses reaching the 
brain’s blood vessels, reducing blood 
flow to the cortex and hippocampus, 
two brain regions crucial for learning 
and memory. This, in turn, brought a 
decline in tests of cognitive perfor-
mance. The impairment in learning 
and memory was clear even in the 
absence of high blood pressure; 
they observed that the gut is 
reacting to the salt overload and 
directing immune signals that lay the 
basis for deterioration throughout 
the brain’s vital vascular complex 
and compromise cognitive function. 
While this study has only been 
carried out on research animals so 
far, the scientists believe it's likely 
that much of the same applies to 
people.
Lowering salt intake has been 
shown to have beneficial effects to 
overall health, so the researchers 
wanted to know whether these 
effects extend to this newly identified 
signaling cascade that begins in the 
EVERYBODY EATS–WHICH IS, of 
course, why food science stands out 
among scientific fields for its direct 
relevance to everyday citizens. Food 
serves as a source of nourishment, a 
means to achieving better health and 
a centerpiece of social gatherings.
Food is also undergoing constant 
change, as new technologies raise 
ongoing questions for consumers 
looking to make “safe” choices for 
their long-term health. A new Pew 
Research Center report shows an 
American public that is closely 
divided over two broad types of food 
technologies: additives, and geneti-
cally modified (GM) crops or other 
GM ingredients. What’s more, a 
closer look at these public divides 
tells a larger story about how Ameri-
cans assess science.
About half of the public (51 
8

NEWS
U.S. Public Is Closely Divided over Health Risk from 
Food Additives and Genetically Modified Foods
Percent of U.S. adults
51
%
48
%
Say the average person is exposed 
to additives in foods which pose a
serious risk to their health
Say the average person eats such small
amounts of such food additives that this
does not pose a serious health risk
50
%
50
%
Say any of 4 types of food additives
pose a great deal of health risk for the 
average person over time
Say none of 4 types of food additives 
pose a great deal of health risk for the 
average person over time
49
%
44
%
Say GM foods are worse 
for one’s health than 
non-GM foods
Say GM foods are neither better 
nor worse for one’s health than 
non-GM foods
Note: Respondents who did not give an answer are not shown. Beliefs about the health 
effects of genetically modified (GM) foods include those who lean toward each 
response. Respondents who said GM foods are better for one’s health are not shown.
Source: Survey conducted April 23 to May 6, 2018.
“Public Perspectives on Food Risks”
PEW RESERACH CENTER
percent) believes the average person 
faces a serious health risk over the 
long term from eating foods with 
additives, while 48 percent say poten-
tially threatening additives exist in 
such small amounts that there is no 
serious health risk.
More specifically, the center asked 
people to evaluate the potential risk 
of four types of additives associated 
with the production and processing of 
food: meat from animals given 
hormones or antibiotics, produce 
grown with pesticides and artificial 
preservatives or artificial coloring. The 
public was evenly divided with half 
(50 percent) saying at least one of 
the four poses a great deal of health 
risk to the average person and half 
saying none of these pose a great 
deal of health risk.
Similarly, there is a close division 
among the public about the health 
effects of GM, also known as geneti-
cally engineered, foods; about half 
(49 percent) consider such foods to 
be worse for one’s health than foods 
with no GM ingredients, while 44 
percent say GM foods are neither 
better nor worse than non-GM foods, 
and 5 percent say they are better for 
one’s health.
These beliefs do not exist in 
isolation from one another. Rather, 
they tend to be closely connected. 
That is, those who see more health 
risk from food additives also tend to 
see GM foods as worse for one’s 
health than non-GM foods. Further, 
this is an area where people’s beliefs 
tend to align with their eating habits. 
For example, people who estimate 
that a larger share of their diet is 
organic—foods which, by design, are 
intended to eliminate artificial preser-
vatives, flavors and colors as well as 
pesticides and genetically modified 
ingredients—are more inclined to see 
serious health risks for the average 
person from additives in foods and to 
consider GM foods worse for one’s 
health than foods with no GM 
ingredients.
It might be easy to discount the 
public’s differences over food. After 
all, the divides do not fall along the 
familiar fault lines of public opinion 
seen on many other civic issues. We 
are living in an age of polarization, but 
there are no more than modest 
differences about food issues by 
political party. Nor are there consis-
tent divides by age or generation. 
Women are consistently warier than 
men about both food additives and 
GM foods. But the correlation is not 
so large that you could easily pinpoint 
a person’s point of view by knowing 
simply whether they are male or 
female.
Nonetheless, these latest surveys 
indicate that people have their own 
set of beliefs about these issues—and 
these beliefs are consequential when 
it comes to their assessments of 
science. For example, among those 
who say that all four types of food 
additives considered in the survey 
9

NEWS
Beliefs about Additives, GM Foods Tie with More
Negative Views of How Science Influences Food in U.S.
Percent of U.S. adults who say science has had a         effect on the quality of food in the U.S.
Mostly negative
 Mostly positive
U.S. adults
70%
29%
Among those who say        types of food
additives pose a great deal of health risk
4 of 4
56
44
2 or 3 of 4
60
39
1 of 4
69
31
0 of 4
81
18
Among those who say GM foods are...
44
56
Worse for one’s heath, and who care
about GM foods issue a great deal
62
37
Worse for one’s heath, and who care
about GM foods issue some or less
Neither better nor worse for one’s health
85
14
PEW RESERACH CENTER
connect with health. Indeed, the 
back-and-forth, conflicting media 
reports about the health effects of 
what we eat and drink are often 
cited as sources of public confu-
sion over food issues. But a key 
insight from the center’s public 
opinion research is that, against 
the backdrop of ongoing develop-
ments, Americans have their own 
set of interconnecting beliefs 
about food issues, often converg-
ing with their own personal eating 
habits. These findings suggest that 
those interested in reaching wide 
audiences would do well to 
engage with those holding deep 
concerns about these issues to 
better understand their perspec-
tive and how it ties into their 
assessment of the scientific 
enterprise. 
 
 
—Cary Funk
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
pose a great deal of health risk, 56 
percent believe the effect of science 
on the quality of food has been 
mostly negative, while 44 percent 
say the effect has been mostly 
positive. By contrast, 81 percent of 
those who say none of the four 
types of food additives pose a 
great deal of health risk believe 
that science has had a positive 
effect on food quality in the U.S.
Similarly, the 17 percent of 
Americans who believe that GM 
foods are worse for one’s health and 
say they care a great deal about the 
GM foods issue are far more 
negative in their assessment. Among 
this group, 44 percent say the effect 
of science on the quality of food in 
the U.S. has been mostly positive, 
while 56 percent say it has been 
negative. For comparison, those who 
say that GM foods are neither better 
nor worse than other foods are 
largely positive about the effect of 
science; 85 percent of this group 
says science has had a mostly 
positive effect on the quality of food 
in the U.S.
Food scientists, industry groups 
and health care professionals are 
themselves often at odds over which 
foods are safe and how foods 
Note: Respondents who did not give an answer are not shown. Beliefs about the health 
effects of genetically modified (GM) foods include those who lean toward each response. 
Respondents who said GM foods are better for one’s health are not shown.
Source: Survey conducted April 23 to May 6, 2018.
“Public Perspectives on Food Risks”
10

NEWS
Too Good to Be 
True? A Nonaddictive 
Opioid without 
Lethal Side Effects 
Shows Promise
A still-experimental drug  
demonstrates the qualities  
of an ideal painkiller in a test  
in monkeys
GETTY IMAGES
WITH NEARLY 50,000 DRUG over-
dose deaths from opioids in 2017 
and an estimated two million Ameri-
cans addicted, the opioid crisis con-
tinues to rage throughout the U.S. 
This statistic must be contrasted with 
another: 25 million Americans live 
with daily chronic pain, for which few 
treatment options are available apart 
from opioid medications.
Opioid drugs like morphine and 
Oxycontin are still held as the gold 
standard when it comes to relieving 
pain. But it has become brutally 
obvious that opioids have dangerous 
side effects, including physical 
dependence, addiction and the 
impaired breathing that too often 
leads to death from an overdose. 
Researchers have long been search-
ing for a drug that would relieve pain 
without such a heavy toll, with few 
results so far.
Now a study in monkeys published 
in Science Translational Medicine 
shows a new type of opioid drug met 
all the criteria on drug developers’ 
wish list. The findings even suggest 
that instead of causing addiction, the 
new compound might be used to 
curb addiction and pain all at once. 
The study was led by Mei-Chuan 
(Holden) Ko, a researcher at Wake 
Forest University, and medical 
chemist Nurulain Zaveri, founder of 
California-based Astraea Therapeu-
tics. “They’ve got something here 
that’s really important,” says William 
Schmidt, a pharmaceutical consul-
tantbased in Davis, Calif., who was 
not involved in the work. “I think the 
chances of a compound with these 
properties moving forward are high, 
and simultaneously pretty exciting.”
Opioid drugs relieve pain by acting 
at four types of opioid receptors 
found throughout the nervous system. 
The mu opioid receptor is primarily 
responsible for opioids’ pain-relieving 
effects—and for their side effects as 
well. Delta and kappa opioid recep-
tors can also modulate pain signals, 
but they come with their own side 
effects. A fourth receptor, called the 
nociceptin/orphanin FQ peptide 
(NOP) receptor, was discovered 
relatively recently, in the 1990s, and 
researchers are still figuring out how 
it works.
Studies of NOP have shown that it 
too has analgesic effects in ro-
dents—but seemingly without the 
side effects that come with mu 
receptor activation. And an addition-
al benefit comes when the two 
receptors interact with each other. 
The inspiration for the new com-
pound, called AT-121, came when 
Ko discovered that by activating 
NOP, he could enhance the pain-re-
lieving effects at the mu receptor. 
“We hypothesized that if we could 
find a single molecule that activated 
both receptors, NOP could enhance 
mu’s analgesic effects and mediate 
the abuse potential,” he says.
The researchers investigated the 
11

NEWS
 
The Biology of 
Sugars Points to a 
Sweet Strategy for 
Treating Cancer 
Long-ignored field attracts interest 
from companies trying to develop 
next-generation immune therapies
“To have the 
combination of 
analgesia and the 
lack of mu receptor–
related side effects, 
plus the ability to 
block the euphoric 
effects of Oxycontin—
that’s unique."
—Wiilliam Schmidt
effects, plus the ability to block the 
euphoric effects of Oxycontin—that’s 
unique,” Schmidt says.
“It gave very effective pain relief, 
the rewarding effects were not there 
and it suppressed the addictive 
potential of Oxycontin,” Zaveri says. 
“That suggests it could be a replace-
ment for prescription pain opioids, 
and it could actually be given to 
someone who is addicted.”
The concept of trying to finesse 
pain relief by activating multiple 
opioid receptors is not new. A drug 
called cebranopadol, for example, 
also activates both the NOP and mu 
opioid receptors, and is in clinical 
trials for several pain conditions, but 
the drug might still be addictive.
There is little evidence traditional 
opioids provide benefits for people 
with chronic pain, and this drug might 
not either. The timing of the drug’s 
actions, Schmidt says, “is ideal for 
acute, postoperative pain. It might 
have the ideal properties for use in 
the hospital, but for broader use as 
a nonaddictive chronic pain drug, 
you would want an oral drug that 
works longer.”
—Stephani Sutherland
 
effects of AT-121 in rhesus mon-
keys with tests commonly used to 
compare new painkiller drug candi-
dates with opioids such as morphine. 
Monkeys were trained to sit with their 
tails in a bath of hot water, which they 
normally tolerate for only a couple of 
seconds. After an injection of AT-121 
they kept their tails in hot water for 
up to 20 seconds, indicating a potent 
analgesic effect. After monkeys’ tails 
were treated with capsaicin, the 
ingredient that makes hot chilis hot, 
they developed pain hypersensitivity, 
making them even less tolerant of the 
hot water. But after receiving AT-121 
they could keep their tails in the 
water much longer than expected.
Even at higher doses, AT-121 did 
not cause the side effects that make 
most opioids so dangerous—sup-
pression of breathing and heart rate, 
itch and physical dependence (in 
which stopping use leads to with-
drawal symptoms). Even after 
several doses AT-121 retained its 
analgesic effect, whereas most 
opioids require an increasing dosage 
over time to achieve pain relief.
To test the compound’s addictive 
potential, the researchers allowed 
monkeys to self-administer a variety 
of drugs. With remifentanil, powerful 
opioids or cocaine, monkeys pressed 
a lever repeatedly to receive increas-
ing doses of the drugs, a hallmark of 
rewarding substances. In contrast, 
monkeys only pressed a lever to 
receive AT-121 at a similar rate as 
injections of a saline solution, 
indicating that the drug was not 
rewarding.
More surprising was the finding 
pretreatment with AT-121 reduced 
the monkeys’ lever-pressing to 
receive Oxycontin, a widely used and 
highly addictive opioid. That suggests 
AT-121 could reduce the addictive 
properties of other opioids. “To have 
the combination of analgesia and the 
lack of mu receptor–related side 
OVER THE LAST FEW decades, re-
searchers tinkering with molecules 
that turn an immune cell on and off 
have created a revolutionary ap-
proach to fighting cancer. Instead of 
taking aim at the tumor directly, this 
new class of medicines harnesses 
the patient’s own immune cells to 
tackle the disease. Immune-based 
cancer therapies are saving thou-
sands of lives, and the science be-
hind them earned the 2018 Nobel 
Prize in Physiology or Medicine.
These drugs, called checkpoint 
blockers, appeared after scientists 
discovered molecules that help 
cancer cells block immune process-
es that would otherwise attack a 
tumor. The secret lies with several 
“brake” proteins on white blood cells, 
T cells, that prevent the immune sys-
tem from overreacting to microbial 
12

NEWS
Colored scanning electron micrograph (SEM) 
of T lymphocyte cells (smaller round cells) 
attached to a cancer cell.
STEVE GSCHMEISSNER GETTY IMAGES
threats. Tumor cells have learned to 
survive by engaging the brake 
molecules, sending T cells into a 
stupor that allows cancer to gain a 
foothold. By thwarting this hijacking 
maneuver, checkpoint blockers 
release the brakes and awaken T 
cells to attack the tumor. A clever 
trick—except that so far, these 
immune-based drugs only work in 
about a fifth of cancer patients and 
for certain tumors, barely at all.
To push past those limits, a few 
companies are venturing into a new 
frontier—glycobiology, the science of 
the sugars that stud the surface of 
cells. Sugars act like switches and 
knobs that control where and when a 
cell’s biological machines, proteins 
and lipids, do their jobs. Yet for all 
their fine-tuning finesse and power, 
sugars are highly complex molecules 
that have often eluded a deeper 
understanding of their workings 
because they are so hard to study in 
the lab.
Recently, though, the science has 
caught up and biotech companies 
have begun to build on these findings 
to develop anti-cancer drugs. Last 
November at an American Associa-
tion for Cancer Research meeting in 
Miami, Palleon Pharmaceuticals, a 
Massachusetts startup, unveiled new 
data from experiments in rodents on 
a profoundly different set of check-
point blockers that target sugars.
These experimental drugs work by 
interfering with complex sugars called 
glycans that coat the surface of 
tumor cells and let them pass unno-
ticed by the otherwise vigilant 
immune system. It’s an “underappreci-
ated mechanism of immune evasion,” 
says Michael O’Dwyer, a clinician-re-
searcher at National University of 
Ireland, Galway, who has no ties to 
Palleon. Many researchers are going 
after the T cells’ braking systems, he 
says, but “probably with diminishing 
returns.” He adds: “There’s only so 
much you can get out of the T cells.”
Jim Broderick, chief executive and 
founder of Palleon, compares the 
immune system to a football team. 
Defending against threats—whether 
bacteria, viruses or cancer—requires a 
coordinated effort from many cell 
types with different roles. Following 
the game analogy, the current wave 
of cancer immunotherapies focuses 
on the quarterback. “But Tom Brady 
can’t win the Super Bowl if he has 
third graders on his offensive line,” 
Broderick says.
Palleon launched in 2015 on the 
strength of research by a handful of 
labs suggesting that structured 
patterns of cell-surface glycans—a 
molecular fingerprint on virtually all 
cells—might hold the key to rousing a 
host of additional cancer-fighting 
immune cells. These macrophages, 
natural killer cells and other cells 
make up a different arm of the 
immune system. Known as innate 
immune cells, these cells form the 
body’s first line of defense, which 
sets the stage for a subsequent 
T-cell attack.
One particular glycan, sialic acid, is 
sensed by a family of surface 
proteins found mostly on innate 
immune cells but also on activated T 
cells at tumor sites. These proteins, 
called Siglecs, act as molecular 
brakes. When Siglecs bind to sialic 
acids, coating the surface of a tumor, 
the immune cell goes to sleep. 
Several companies—including Innate 
Pharma in Marseille, France, and 
South San Francisco–based Alector—
are hoping to wake those drowsy 
cells with therapies that block Siglecs.
A team of researchers led by 
Palleon co-founder Carolyn Bertozzi, 
13

NEWS
Deep dives 
into today’s 
most exciting 
science.
Collector’s Editions
sciam.com/specials
to see if glycan-modifying 
enzymes correlate with clinical 
outcomes. “This is about as 
straightforward a drug develop-
ment program as you could want. 
It’s translatable to other surface 
proteins, and they could easily 
make additional therapies.”
Whereas the vast majority of 
immune therapies target a single 
molecular interaction, Bertozzi’s is 
a broader approach that is “much 
more robust because sialic acids 
are recognized by multiple 
receptors on different immune 
cells,” says Yvette van Kooyk, an 
immunologist at VU University 
Medical Center in the Nether-
lands, who wrote a recent review 
about cancer’s “glyco-code” and 
learned about Palleon’s drug 
program at an earlier cancer 
conference in September 2018. 
The cancer field has really 
neglected the importance of 
glycans,” van Kooyk says. “But 
they have a very immune-sup-
pressing function. To overcome 
that, it’s necessary for new 
treatments to also do something 
with these glyco-codes.” 
—Esther Landhuis
a Stanford chemist, went after 
these same molecular pathways 
with a radically different ap-
proach. Rather than trying to 
block individual Siglec molecules 
on the surface of immune cells, 
the researchers designed a 
therapeutic that stymies all 
Siglecs by trimming sialic acids 
off the tumor cell. In a 2016 
proof-of-concept study, the team 
showed that treating a dish of 
breast cancer cells with the 
experimental drug exposed them 
to killing by natural killer cells.
At another immunotherapy 
meeting in Washington, D.C., in 
November, Palleon vice president 
Li Peng presented data showing 
this strategy can work in mice 
with implanted tumors—even in 
ones that draw weak responses 
with FDA-approved check-
point-blocking drugs. In separate 
experiments, the team confirmed 
that T cells, macrophages and 
natural killer cells all contribute to 
the drug’s benefit. Cancer cells 
“are like wolves in sheep’s 
clothing—bad guys disguising 
themselves with the glycan code,” 
Peng says. By removing sialic 
acids from glycans on the surface 
of tumor cells, the drug “reveals 
their real identity so immune cells 
can see the bad guys.”
Dong Zhang, director of 
immunology at the German 
company EMD Serono, consid-
ered Peng’s talk “one of the most 
exciting findings” at that meeting. 
To make the original version of 
the therapeutic, Bertozzi and 
colleagues chemically fused the 
sialic acid–trimming enzyme to an 
antibody that recognizes a 
hallmark protein (HER2) on the 
surface of breast cancer cells. 
The antibody is needed to restrict 
the enzyme’s activity to the tumor. 
Otherwise the enzyme would cut 
indiscriminately and wreak havoc, 
since sialic acids also play vital 
roles on healthy cells.
With an eye toward human trials 
by 2020, Peng’s team at Palleon 
has created a means to produce 
the antibody-enzyme combo 
without a tricky chemical synthe-
sis. All they have to do is take an 
existing tumor-targeting antibody 
and hook it onto the enzyme, says 
Jason Luke, a medical oncologist 
at the University of Chicago 
School of Medicine, who leads a 
Palleon-funded research project 
Scientific American is a registered trademark of Springer Nature America, Inc.
14

Johnson & Johnson  
has submitted its 
esketamine for 
regulatory approval, 
but researchers still 
don’t understand how 
the fast-acting 
antidepressant  
lifts moods  
By Sara Reardon
CHRIS GASH
Generation  
Ketamine
15

Sara Reardon is a senior reporter at Nature in 
Washington, D.C., covering biomedical research and 
policy. She has previously written for New Scientist 
and Science and has a master’s degree in molecular 
biology from the University of Washington.
grams.” Until a clearer picture of the mechanism is 
worked out, the field may be doomed to a trial-and-error 
hunt for better-than-ketamine mimetics.
W
hen researchers showed in 2006 that the anesthetic ketamine—
also known as the club drug Special K—was a rapid and potent 
antidepressant, big pharmaceutical companies quickly jumped 
into the game. Extensive efforts to improve on decades-old 
antidepressants had floundered, but ketamine finally promised a 
novel mechanism of action and the potential to help treatment-
resistant patients.  
   Because ketamine is an old drug and difficult to commercialize for a new indication, early entrants into 
this space set out to build ketamine mimetics that could replicate the anesthetic’s effect, ideally without 
its hallucinatory side effects. A few of these ketamine-inspired drugs are now nearing the finish line. In 
September, Johnson & Johnson (J&J) filed for FDA approval of a nasal spray containing esketamine—an 
isomer of ketamine that the company has patented. Despite some lingering questions about its efficacy 
compared with ketamine, experts in the field expect the drug will be approved, providing the first 
antidepressant breakthrough in decades.
Yet it is far from clear how this work will play out. 
Whereas early evidence suggested that ketamine acted 
through the NMDA receptor, many of the first-genera-
tion ketamine mimetics that were designed to act on 
this target failed in clinical trials. Accumulating evi-
dence now suggests that ketamine’s antidepressant 
activity may be more complicated.
As a result, some companies are quietly going back to 
the drawing board. “My sense is that NMDA-receptor- 
blocking studies are diminishing quite quickly and peo-
ple are looking at other mechanisms,” says psychiatrist 
Carlos Zarate at the National Institute of Mental Health 
(NIMH). While NMDA blockers haven’t been abandoned, 
he says, “companies are just giving a second thought to 
whether they want to continue pursuing these pro-
NOVEL ANTIDEPRESSANT ACTIVITY
The most commonly used antidepressants target signal-
ing by the monoamine neurotransmitters serotonin, 
dopamine and noradrenaline. But starting in the 1950s, 
researchers using the antibiotic D-cycloserine to treat 
tuberculosis found that the drug alleviated patient mel-
ancholy. Researchers later learned that the antibiotic, at 
low doses, blocks the NMDA receptor, a glutamate recep-
tor. Then in the late 1990s, when psychiatrist John Krys-
tal of Yale University was curious about whether the 
neurotransmitter glutamate contributed to schizophre-
nia, he decided to test the known NMDA receptor antag-
onist ketamine in nine depressed patients.
At the time, glutamate had mostly been studied for its 
role in learning and memory. But Krystal’s group found 
that ketamine induced a rapid improvement in mood in 
patients.
Zarate and Husseini Manji, who is now head neurosci-
ence researcher at J&J, set out to replicate the surpris-
ing findings at the NIMH in a larger trial, enrolling 18 
subjects with major depression. The results from this 
small study suggested that ketamine was a miracle 
drug—lifting a person’s mood almost immediately. 
Reporting in the Archives of General Psychiatry, they 
showed that 70 percent of depressed patients respond-
“What’s exciting is not that there’s going to be a new 
drug approved, but that we’re going to have a whole new 
class of drug approved,” says psychiatrist James Mur-
rough at Mount Sinai Hospital. “Everyone’s waiting with 
bated breath.”
This is fostering high hopes that psychiatric drug devel-
opment—which has seen an exodus of major pharma com-
panies owing to continuing failures—could be poised for 
a renaissance. The number of ketamine trials has skyrock-
eted, not only for depression but also for obsessive-com-
pulsive disorder, post-traumatic stress disorder and even 
chronic pain. “If ketamine works and we understand the 
effects of ketamine on these different disorders, it could 
really open the way for drug discovery,” says Lisa Monteg-
gia, a neuroscientist at Vanderbilt University.
16

“I think once esketamine 
is approved, and it 
becomes likely a 
multibillion-dollar drug, 
you'll see big pharma 
coming back.”     
—Ronald Duman
amine significantly reduced depression at 28 days. But 
the results were not as strong as the company had antic-
ipated, and esketamine took longer to take effect than 
ketamine and missed its secondary end point of lifting 
mood within 24 hours. In the second study in 138 people 
over 65 years old, the drug missed its primary end point.
Nevertheless, these results have buoyed hopes for glu-
tamate-based antidepressants. Whereas Pfizer, Astra-
Zeneca, Roche and others terminated development of 
NMDA receptor modulators for mood disorder in recent 
years owing to failed trials or severe side effects, 
researchers hope that success for J&J will lift all boats.
“I think once esketamine is approved, and it becomes 
likely a multibillion-dollar drug, you’ll see big pharma 
coming back,” says drug researcher Ronald Duman at 
Yale University.
ed to ketamine within 24 hours. By contrast, in one of 
the largest studies of people with depression, only one-
third of patients responded to selective serotonin 
reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) after eight weeks.
Ketamine also appears to reduce suicidal thoughts—
something that no other drug is known to do—and its 
effects last for weeks to months.
“Ketamine works so well it would be hard to do bet-
ter,” says neuroscientist Todd Gould of the University of 
Maryland. Some clinics have taken this conclusion to 
heart, and are already offering ketamine to depressed 
patients on an off-label basis. Drug developers have 
meanwhile been working hard to make next-generation 
alternatives, armed with a preliminary hypothesis for 
how the drug lifts moods.
When ketamine is used as an anesthetic or a halluci-
nogen, it blocks the NMDA receptor. This in turn stimu-
lates the release of a glutamate burst, which is believed 
to be responsible for the drug’s hallucinatory effects. 
The neurotransmitter then stimulates other receptors 
that control gene transcription to enable rapid rewiring 
of brain circuits. This rewiring, or plasticity, is thought 
to cause the antidepressant effect.
When developing a pharmaceutical version of ket-
amine, companies have generally decided to target the 
start of this pathway. J&J, for instance, chose to develop 
the S-enantiomer of ketamine because it is four times as 
potent at blocking the NMDA receptor as regular ket-
amine, which is a mix of R-and S-enantiomers. J&J’s 
Manji says that the company has no plans to compare its 
product directly with ketamine in a clinical trial. But 
overall, esketamine’s side effects—including hallucina-
tions—seem similar to the original drug.
The company recently published results from two 
phase III studies on depression, and will conclude a sui-
cidal ideation trial next year. Clinical trial results were 
mixed, however. In one study of 223 participants, esket-
UPPING THE AMPA?
Basic research on ketamine’s mechanism of action com-
plicates future ketamine-mimetic discovery plans, how-
ever. In 2016, Gould and Zarate published a startling 
paper in Nature, proposing that a metabolic byproduct 
of ketamine—not the drug itself—was responsible for 
the mood-altering activity in mice. The metabolite 
(2R,6R)-hydroxynorketamine, or HNK, didn’t seem to 
interact with the NMDA receptor at all. Nor did it appear 
to cause the hallucinatory side effects of esketamine, 
even at doses nearly 40 times greater than the normal 
dose of ketamine.
The result suggested that drug developers may have 
been going after the wrong target all along. “It definite-
ly created a stir,” says Murrough. “It contributed to a 
realization that we don’t really know how ketamine is 
working, and whatever the mechanism is, it’s not 
simple.”
Others aren’t ready to give up on NMDA inhibition 
just yet. Monteggia reported in 2018 in Neuropsycho-
pharmacology that when she repeated a similar experi-
ment, she found that very high levels of HNK could indi-
rectly block the NMDA receptor through an as-yet-un-
known mechanism.
J&J’s Manji is also skeptical about reading too much 
into the effect of HNK in mice. If the NMDA receptor is 
uninvolved, the company’s esketamine nasal spray 
should not work as well as it has, Manji says. He sus-
pects that previous NMDA antagonist failures can large-
ly be chalked up to dosing problems and side effect pro-
files, rather than a problem with the target itself.
Researchers are trying to reconcile these various 
results. For instance, ketamine might quickly reverse 
depression by blocking the NMDA receptor, but perhaps 
HNK is responsible for maintaining the effect over time, 
says Monteggia. Zarate and Gould are planning to file 
for FDA permission to start clinical trials with HNK in 
2019, which they say should be able to answer some of 
these questions.
Other studies add further complications. In August, a 
12-patient study led by Alan Schatzberg of Stanford Uni-
versity suggested that ketamine might be acting through 
the opioid system and not the glutamatergic system at 
all. The researchers gave depressed patients naltrexone 
to block the opioid receptor before administering ket-
amine, and found that this eliminated ketamine’s anti-
depressant effects but not its hallucinatory side effects.
17

Get the most out of your 
Mind digital subscription.
Keep up with the latest discoveries 
related to the brain and human behavior 
anytime, anywhere
E X P L O R E  N O W
vate AMPA receptors, and animal studies have shown 
that directly blocking AMPA receptors eliminates the 
antidepressant effects of these drugs. Yet targeting 
AMPA receptors directly tends to raise the risk of sei-
zures, Sanacora cautions, making it unlikely that 
AMPA receptor agonists could be turned into 
therapeutics.
Allergan’s chief R&D officer David Nicholson, mean-
while, remains unfazed by the lingering uncertainty 
about the mechanism of action of ketamine-inspired 
drugs—as long as the drugs work. “We didn’t know 
really how tricyclic [antidepressants] were working, or 
how SSRIs were working,” he says. “You can debate if 
we really know that today, to be frank.”
This article is reproduced with permission and 
was first published in Nature on October 30, 2018.
Promising data from Allergan’s lead antidepressant 
rapastinel, an intravenous drug in phase III trials for 
depression and suicidality, add another wrinkle. 
Whereas ketamine and esketamine block the NMDA 
receptor, rapastinel is a partial agonist of the NMDA 
receptor. Phase II data suggest that the drug relieves 
depression quickly and that its effects last for several 
weeks. Phase III trials are currently underway, with 
first pivotal results expected 2019.
And Allergan is doubling down on the mechanism. 
In May 2018, the company bought rights to an experi-
mental oral drug AGN-241751, which targets the NMDA 
receptor and is currently in phase II trials for 
depression.
“It’s really hard to reconcile all those different stud-
ies into a unified model,” says Gerard Sanacora, a psy-
chiatrist at Yale University.
But he, Gould and others believe that studies are 
beginning to home in on one convergent mechanism: 
a glutamate receptor known as AMPA, which is activat-
ed when glutamate levels increase and that stimulates 
brain rewiring. Ketamine, HNK and rapastinel all acti-
Ketamine Clinics
Although the FDA has not approved ketamine for depression and most insurance companies do not 
cover it, an estimated 300 clinics are already providing off-label ketamine to depression patients.
Some researchers consequently question the need for next-generation drugs such as esketamine. 
“It’s not going to do anything ketamine doesn’t do, but it will cost 10 to 100 times as much as ket-
amine,” says Scott Thompson, a neurobiologist at the University of Maryland. “If esketamine is safe 
enough to release into the general population, then ketamine is safe enough.  
It’s a backwards way to get a drug approved.”
But ketamine is not a perfect drug, either. In 2017, researchers published a consensus paper for the 
American Psychiatric Association that included guidelines for physicians prescribing ketamine for de-
pression. Among other recommendations, the paper said that ketamine should only be used in the 
clinic and not sent home with patients because of the potential for abuse. It also warned about the 
lack of long-term data and the acute risks for people with heart conditions.
Esketamine faces similar limitations, and if approved will also be administered in the clinic. 
18

A crowded market day in  
Uganda. Rates of hepatitis B  
are surging in several  
sub-Saharan African nations.
The Silent Epidemic Killing More  
People Than HIV, Malaria or TB
Viral hepatitis is on the rise. Tackling hepatitis B in Africa is key to fighting back
CHRISTOPHE COURTEAU ALAMY
By Ian Graber-Stiehl
19

Ian Graber-Stiehl is a science writer in Chicago.
RISING DEATH TOLL
Hepatitis infections are now associated with more deaths globally than are tuberculosis, HIV or malaria. 
2
N
Hepatitis
HIV
Tuberculosis 
1
Hepatitis B
Malaria
World deaths (millions)
0
2000
2005
2010
2015
SOURCE: GLOBAL HEALTH ESTIMATES 2016
URU WAS PREPARED 
for the worst when she 
went to get screened for 
HIV eight years ago. After 
caring for her mother in 
Uganda, who died as a 
result of the virus, Nuru 
moved to the United King-
dom to study, and decided 
to take her health into her 
own hands. “I was ready to be told I had HIV,” she says. “I 
felt, ‘That’s okay. I’ve looked up to my mother.’”
What she didn’t expect was to be diagnosed with a dif-
ferent viral infection altogether: hepatitis B. “The way 
the health worker delivered it to me, it was like, ‘It’s 
worse than HIV.’ I was confused, I was suicidal,” says 
Nuru (who asked that her real name not be used for this 
article). “I just didn’t understand what it was because no 
one ever talks about hep B—they talk about HIV. That’s 
well researched, it’s well talked about, well documented. 
It’s all over the television. But hep B is not.”
The hepatitis B virus (HBV), which spreads through 
blood and bodily fluids and invades liver cells, is thought 
to kill just under 1 million people every year around the 
world, mostly from cancer or scarring (cirrhosis) of the liv-
er. HBV is less likely to be fatal than HIV, and many peo-
ple who carry the virus don’t have symptoms. But because 
more than 250 million people live with chronic HBV infec-
tions, more than seven times the number with HIV, its 
global death toll now rivals that of the more-feared virus.
Hepatitis—or liver inflammation—is caused by a num-
ber of viruses, but types B and C are associated with the 
most deaths. In 2016, the most recent year for which 
estimates are available, the number of deaths worldwide 
from viral hepatitis rose to 1.4 million, outstripping 
those from tuberculosis, HIV or malaria individually.
This is despite the fact that HBV infection can be pre-
vented by vaccination early in childhood and treated 
with the same antiretroviral drugs used to combat HIV. 
“HIV has been an acute pandemic with resources thrown 
at it. That’s a completely different picture than hep B, 
which has traveled with humankind for tens of thou-
sands of years—and by dint of that invisible carriage, has 
never had that injection of political advocacy, funding, 
energy and education that’s gone into HIV,” says Philip-
pa Matthews, an immunologist at the University of 
Oxford, U.K., who studies viral infections such as HBV.
Researchers and health workers are now hoping to 
change that. Two years ago, the World Health Assembly 
endorsed a World Health Organization (WHO) strategy 
to eliminate hepatitis as a public-health threat by 2030, 
which the WHO defined as reducing new infections by 
90 percent and deaths by 65 percent.
A major focus is to combat the growing HBV crisis in 
20

AN UNEQUAL BURDEN
The hepatitis B virus (HBV) is most prevalent in Africa and the Western Pacific, 
but in infants (inset), it is found mainly in Africa.
HBV prevalence
All ages
<2%
2–4%
5–7%
>8%
No data
Under 5s
sub-Saharan Africa. Other high-risk regions, such as the 
Western Pacific (which stretches from China to New 
Zealand), have long inoculated children against the 
virus, following a 1992 WHO decision to include HBV in 
routine vaccination protocols. As a result, although 
around 6 percent of people in the region are still living 
with HBV, most children and teenagers there are pro-
tected. But in sub-Saharan Africa, where it’s also esti-
mated that about 6 percent of the population are cur-
rently infected, fewer than one-tenth of children receive 
the necessary inoculations. The region also ranks last in 
every other intervention, including screening and diag-
nosis, and in treating those living with the virus.
“Hepatitis B has been, to a large extent, neglected,” says 
Ponsiano Ocama, a hepatologist at Makerere University in 
Kampala, Uganda. Health care workers, he says, are gen-
erally undereducated and ill-equipped to treat the virus. 
Matthews adds that priority for antiretroviral drugs is 
weighted so heavily in favor of people with HIV that some 
health care workers think those with HBV stand a better 
chance of receiving adequate care if they contract HIV as 
well, even though having both infections increases the 
chance of early death.
With little routine screening, there are also many gaps 
in researchers’ understanding of the prevalence and out-
comes of hepatitis in vulnerable populations. While the 
fight against hepatitis is buoyed by progress in Western 
Pacific nations, the crisis in sub-Saharan Africa is flying 
under the radar. “It’s a critical time for the region,” says 
Matthews.
SOURCE: WHO HEPATITIS B DASHBOARD
KNOWLEDGE GAP
Nuru left her U.K. screening appointment dejected, and 
feeling that she knew little about her infection. She 
turned to the Internet to answer questions she felt had 
been glossed over by the health care professionals she 
saw. Public ignorance about transmission, but awareness 
that HBV can be passed on during unprotected sex, has 
given the infection a stigma that, says Nuru, smacks of 
the whispers that emerged around HIV when that virus 
first came to light in sub-Saharan Africa. Nuru’s body is 
suppressing the virus well enough that she does not need 
treatment, but she doesn’t talk openly about it. If news 
that she has HBV spreads back to Uganda, she says, then 
she worries people will regard her family there with sus-
picion. “They will be segregated, isolated—they won’t get 
jobs,” she says.
Kenneth Kabagambe, who founded Uganda’s National 
Organization for People Living with Hepatitis B (NOPLHB) 
in 2011, after a friend died with the infection, says he had 
a similar experience when he himself was diagnosed in 
2012. His doctor, he said, left him wondering whether the 
disease might even be comparable to Ebola.
As Kabagambe and Nuru would learn, hepatitis is some-
times referred to as the silent epidemic, because its carri-
ers do not initially show symptoms. In some cases, the 
virus responsible can sabotage the liver’s function over 
years without causing noticeable problems, until eventu-
ally a viral takeover causes cirrhosis or liver cancer.
Hepatitis C virus (HCV) is an RNA virus that is spread 
largely through blood—usually through unscreened 
blood donations, drug use, reuse of unsterilized equip-
ment in hospitals and, to a lesser extent, unprotected sex. 
There is no vaccine against it, but antiviral medications 
can cure a chronic infection in most people. By contrast, 
HBV (a DNA virus, like HIV) is less malignant—in that 
fewer adults develop chronic infections—but more wide-
21

VACCINATION LAG
Africa is the least-vaccinated region against hepatitis B; the Western Pacific, the most. 
Only one in ten infants in Africa are vaccinated at birth.
Vaccinated at birth
Receive 3 doses of vaccine
100
Western 
Pacific
Global
Africa
50
Coverage (%)
0
2000
2005
2010
2015
2000
2005
2010
2015
spread. It affects almost four times as many people as 
HCV, and is more likely than HCV to be spread from 
mother to baby during pregnancy or birth. HBV infection 
is also divided more along economic lines: it is, says Oca-
ma, largely “a disease of the poor.”
In contrast to people with HIV, adults who don’t 
already have HBV are unlikely to become infected—and, 
if they do, there is only a small chance of developing a 
chronic infection or passing it on to other adults. The 
group at highest risk of becoming infected and transmit-
ting HBV is infants, who have weaker immune systems. 
Compared with adults with HBV, toddlers “teem with the 
virus,” says Mark Sonderup, a hepatitis researcher at the 
University of Cape Town, South Africa. So, screening and 
treating infected mothers, and vaccinating babies, is key 
to cracking down on HBV. Yet, myths still circulate among 
health workers in Africa about how HBV is transmitted, 
including that adults with the virus should be isolated. 
This perpetuates the infection’s stigma, says Ocama.
There are some subtleties to this picture. In Western 
Pacific nations, the main transmission route for strains of 
HBV tends to be from mother to baby, according to 
research that dovetailed with the vaccination campaigns 
there in the 1990s. In sub-Saharan Africa, however—which 
has different HBV strains—mothers with the infection 
tend to have lower viral loads, making it slightly less like-
ly that they will infect their babies during pregnancy or 
birth. Viral transmission from child to child, through the 
usual scratches of rough play and the lackluster hygiene 
of youth, seems to be a more prominent infection route.
SOURCE: WHO WORLD HEPATITIS REPORT 2017
VACCINE PUSH
For many years, policymakers thought that rolling out 
vaccinations would be enough to halt HBV, says Maud 
Lemoine, a hepatologist at Imperial College London. 
That’s true in principle, but the vaccine’s design makes it 
difficult to administer. It is generally given in three 
parts. The first is a “birth dose,” which is most effective 
if given within 24 hours of birth. The other two doses are 
given later and several weeks apart. From 1990 to 2015, 
the proportion of children getting three HBV inocula-
tions skyrocketed from 1 percent to 84 percent, with the 
Western Pacific leading the way at more than 90 percent 
coverage, just above that in the Americas; Africa lags 
behind at 70 percent.
But in practice, the first dose is not always given at 
birth—coverage of this dose is only 39 percent globally—
and its timing is not always reported. In Africa, coverage 
at birth is just 10 percent. Administering a birth dose 
within 24 hours, and follow-up vaccinations on schedule, 
poses a monumental challenge in a region where many 
births are not supervised by medical professionals.
The challenge of accessing mothers in time has been 
compounded by a reliance on Gavi, the Vaccine Alliance, 
an international organization that connects public and 
private sectors to roll out vaccines. Gavi has been a driv-
ing force in expanding HBV vaccination in sub-Saharan 
Africa. But it does this through a compound inoculation 
that immunizes against diphtheria, pertussis, tetanus, 
HBV and influenza, but which isn’t given until six to 
eight weeks of age. A spokesperson says that the organi-
zation has not focused on providing the birth-dose vac-
cine, in part because it had not seen evidence that distri-
bution systems could get the inoculations to infants with-
in 24 hours of birth, and because it felt the more expensive 
five-fold vaccine was a better target for subsidy.
Last November, however, Gavi’s board voted to priori-
tize investment in HBV birth-dose vaccines, as part of a 
strategy targeting six new vaccine programs from 2021 to 
22

DIAGNOSIS GAP
The World Health Organization wants to diagnose 90 percent of hepatitis B infections by 2030. 
The rate is currently 10 percent.
HBV infections 
257 million
Africa
2025. And success in other vaccination campaigns shows 
that it should be possible to overcome distribution chal-
lenges. In the 1990s, researchers in Indonesia gave pre-
packaged single-use hepatitis B vaccines to local mid-
wives so that they could administer an inoculation after 
home births, an approach now used more widely. And 
two years ago, researchers in Laos demonstrated that 
providing mobile phones to vigilant health workers and 
local volunteers helped keep track of births and ensure 
more infants were vaccinated.
HBV diagnoses
27 million
Western
Pacific
Other
Southeast Asia
SOURCE: "ACCESS TO TREATMENT FOR HEPATITIS B VIRUS INFECTION — WORLDWIDE, 2016." BY YVAN HUTIN ET AL. 
MORBIDITY AND MORTALITY WEEKLY REPORT, VOL. 67, ISSUE 28; JULY 20, 2018. 
SCREENING RESEARCH
Another key to tackling HBV is screening and diagnosing 
adults. Mothers are among the most crucial people to 
check because of their propensity to pass the virus on to 
their babies. “If you find infected antenatal women, you 
can also screen their partners. You can vaccinate any 
household contacts who aren’t infected. You can identify 
any other household contacts who are infected and treat 
them,” says Matthews. “It gives you a route into more 
population-level interventions.”
But mothers are not routinely checked before giving 
birth. Add to that a paucity of cancer registries with accu-
rate data on liver cancer, and a generally low regional 
turnout for testing, and it’s of little surprise that research-
ers’ picture of the prevalence and dynamics of hepatitis 
viruses are plagued with gaps.
Instead, the populations that are screened most reli-
ably are those who donate blood and people such as Nuru 
and Kabagambe, who saw firsthand how HIV ravaged 
their communities and decided to get tested. Many 
health professionals have criticized initiatives such as 
Gavi and the U.S. President’s Emergency Plan for AIDS 
Relief for not doing more to leverage HIV-testing net-
works to also provide screening for hepatitis. Lemoine 
points out that one negative HBV test is probably all that 
an adult needs, because it is so unlikely that they will be 
infected, whereas people might need to be retested for 
HIV many times.
Initial screens cost only a few dollars: health workers 
simply check the person’s blood for evidence that their 
immune system has developed antibodies against the 
hepatitis viruses. But these checks, says Matthews, test 
only whether you’ve been exposed to the viruses, not 
whether you’re currently infected. To get a definitive 
diagnosis, people need more-expensive nucleic-acid tests 
that detect the viral DNA of HBV (or, for HCV, viral RNA). 
The cost can be as high as U.S. $200—something that few 
people in sub-Saharan Africa can afford, says Olufunmi-
layo Lesi, a member of the WHO’s advisory group on viral 
hepatitis. Fewer than 1 percent of those in the region 
with HBV, and 6 percent of those with HCV, are diag-
nosed, according to a WHO estimate.
DRIVING FORWARD
Several countries in sub-Saharan Africa are now expand-
ing their screening efforts, including Uganda, which 
hopes to tie its effort to a vaccination drive aimed at 
mothers and infants, says Ocama. And researchers have 
been working on more convenient diagnostic tests. In 
2017, the WHO approved a test that detects HCV RNA and 
runs on equipment found in most hospitals in sub-Saha-
ran Africa—the GeneXpert nucleic-acid system. Made by 
Cepheid, a company in Sunnyvale, California, it is already 
used to diagnose HIV and tuberculosis. A test for HBV 
that could be run on the GeneXpert machine is in beta 
testing, says Sonderup, but has yet to be formally released. 
(Cepheid did not reply to requests for comment.)
As the world has focused on combating HIV, billions 
of dollars have been poured into developing antiretrovi-
23

Digital Matter
about Your Gray Matter
eBooks
In-depth Coverage on 
Neurology, Consciousness, 
Behavior and More
B U Y  N O W
rals—drugs that people with HIV take indefinitely to inhibit 
the replication of DNA viruses. In low-income countries, the 
cost of these drugs is heavily subsidized, and in many cases, the 
same drugs can treat both HIV and HBV.
But when it comes to access to drugs, people with HBV in 
many resource-limited regions find themselves overlooked in 
favor of those with HIV. Ocama says he has known hospital 
administrators who have allowed physicians to administer 
drugs reserved for people with HIV to those with HBV—but 
overall, an abysmally small fraction of people in sub-Saharan 
Africa with HBV receive treatment.
Some countries are increasingly aware that antiretroviral 
drugs need to also reach people with hepatitis. In 2012, Ugan-
da became the first sub-Saharan African country to produce a 
generic form of the antiretroviral tenofovir, through the com-
pany Quality Chemicals, and the drug is offered for free at 
some treatment centers, says Ocama. And in 2017, after years 
of using HIV programs to secure drugs for people with HBV, 
the Senegalese Society of Gastroenterology convinced the gov-
ernment to make tenofovir available to them at a price simi-
lar to that offered to those with HIV.
Still, the stigma of having HBV can be as problematic as 
drug scarcity. Patient groups in Africa, Ocama says, are too few 
and far between. “For many people, I think it is a lonely jour-
ney. It is a place of isolation,” says Nuru. But she and Kabag-
ambe are determined to change this. After Nuru was diag-
nosed, she convinced her siblings to get tested. Three out of six 
tested positive for HBV. Since then, leveraging her sisters in 
Uganda as part of a “whisper network,” she has convinced 13 
other people to be tested, and paid for the procedure.
Meanwhile, the patient network that Kabagambe founded 
is dedicated to educating the public about HBV and establish-
ing a community in which people who have the virus can talk 
about it. “Being diagnosed with hepatitis B does not define 
your end,” he says. “You can still prosper.”
This article is reproduced with permission and was first 
published in Nature on December 5, 2018.
24

Model 
Citizens
How digital drug dealers and virtual 
users are providing clues to help 
stop the U.S. opioid epidemic  
By Sara Reardon
SPENCER PLATT GETTY IMAGES
MAN uses heroin under a bridge in Philadelphia.
25

with the tip of her syringe, Brandi pokes at a gray lump of heroin in a spoon. it’s a new 
variety of the drug that has shown up on the market in the past few days, and Brandi 
likes it. “I feel this more, I feel more of the pain resistance,” she says. Once it has dissolved 
into a liquid, she injects it into her arm, then uses a fresh needle to inject the skinny arm 
of another woman. “She does it better than the hospital,” the woman comments. “I’ll help 
anybody who needs it,” Brandi explains to public health researcher Daniel Ciccarone of the 
University of California, San Francisco, who has been filming the entire process.
guided public policy, their track record with more com-
plex social behavior such as drug use is limited, largely 
because of sparse data and the breadth of parameters to 
consider.
Still, scientists hope that agent-based models can lay 
out scenarios for decision makers, who are often driven 
more by politics than data. “The barriers are not scientif-
ic or medical,” Ciccarone says. “You can throw $1 billion 
at West Virginia, and they may or may not know how to 
use it well.” These virtual worlds can add clarity, says 
Joshua Epstein, director of the Agent-Based Modeling 
Lab at New York University. “You can literally watch the 
thing unfold before your eyes,” he says.
Sara Reardon is a senior reporter at Nature in Washington, D.C., 
covering biomedical research and policy. She has previously written for 
New Scientist and Science and has a master’s degree in molecular 
biology from the University of Washington.
W
Ciccarone’s team has embedded with Brandi—whose 
name has been changed for this story—in Charleston, W.
Va., documenting her interactions without judgment or 
interference. Later, the group will analyze this video, in 
addition to half a dozen other videos of drug users from 
across the city, logging details big and small. Brandi does 
not heat the solution on the spoon, for instance, and that 
may increase the likelihood of spreading viruses such as 
HIV. And tests reveal that what she’s taking has been 
laced with fentanyl, a synthetic drug up to 50 times more 
powerful than heroin.
The researchers will plug these data into powerful com-
puter simulations of Charleston, populated by thousands 
of virtual Brandis—heroin users and dealers going about 
their daily routines. They will watch these digital agents 
buy more heroin as their tolerance increases, form net-
works with sellers and users, and, in some cases, acciden-
tally overdose.
Ciccarone’s is one of several groups using agent-based 
models to understand what is driving the U.S. opioid epi-
demic—the dramatic rise over the past two decades in the 
THE DIFFERENCE IN THE DETAILS
The U.S. opioid crisis is estimated to kill 115 people a day 
through overdoses and has run up $1 trillion in health 
care costs and lost productivity since 2001. It is not the 
first addiction crisis that the U.S. has faced, nor is it the 
most severe. Alcohol use causes many more deaths, and 
the rate of cocaine overdose among African-Americans 
is similar to the rate of opioid overdose in white 
Americans.
But the opioid crisis does have some different driving 
factors, including the prevalence of prescription drugs, 
which many have used on the way to abusing illegal 
drugs, and the introduction of fentanyl, which is often 
used to boost the potency of heroin and is responsible for 
a large share of overdose deaths. The epidemic has also 
hit hard in rural settings, where services and infrastruc-
ture for dealing with addiction are scarce. “The demo-
use of opioids, including prescription pain medications 
and illegal drugs such as heroin. By studying the motiva-
tions and practices of real drug dealers and users, the 
researchers hope to build agents whose behavior in the 
virtual world mimics that in real life.
Agent-based models promise to provide  a more gran-
ular view of the opioid crisis than standard modeling, 
which is based on average populations, and to capture 
some of the complexity of the driving forces. This could 
prove important for demonstrating the effects of open-
ing or closing methadone clinics or needle exchanges. 
The models allow scientists to compare interventions at 
almost no cost and could help policy makers to decide 
how to proceed in the real world. “It’s a very classic and 
useful way to try and see where is the best place to 
deploy an intervention to have the biggest effect,” says 
John Brooks, a medical adviser for the division of HIV/
AIDS prevention at the U.S. Centers for Disease Control 
and Prevention.
Although such simulations have long been used to 
model disease outbreaks and have, in some instances, 
26

WARREN, OHIO, has high rates of unemployment and 
opioid addiction. Here an American flag is painted inside  
the window of a closed business.
SPENCER PLATT GETTY IMAGES
graphic now encompasses a population that in the past 
has not been so affected,” says Nora D. Volkow, director of 
the National Institute on Drug Abuse.
As a result, researchers are coming up with fresh ways 
of thinking about the crisis. It bears similarities to a dis-
ease epidemic, for example, in the way it spreads through 
networks based on personal relationships and physical 
proximity, says Georgiy Bobashev, a data scientist at the 
nonprofit research institute RTI International in Research 
Triangle Park, N.C. “Nobody is born an addict. Somebody 
has to teach you how to smoke or how to inject.”
These personal networks can be replicated using 
agent-based modeling. Unlike other types of models, 
which may rely on average characteristics or relation-
ships between homogeneous groups to inform algo-
rithms, agent-based models allow researchers to see sub-
tle connections between people. “That’s useful because 
drug use and overdose is inherently personal,” says epi-
demiologist Brandon Marshall of Brown University. Fac-
tors such as job loss, mental health or genetics can influ-
ence how likely a person is to begin using drugs or 
become addicted, but those factors might fade into the 
averages if researchers looked at a population as a whole.
To create an agent-based model, researchers first 
“build” a virtual town or region, sometimes based on a 
real place, including buildings such as schools and food 
shops. They then populate it with agents, using census 
data to give each one its own characteristics, such as age, 
race and income, and to distribute the agents throughout 
the virtual town.
The agents are autonomous but operate within prepro-
grammed routines—going to work five times a week, for 
instance. Some behaviors may be more random, such as 
a 5 percent chance per day of skipping work or a 50 per-
cent chance of meeting a certain person in the agent’s net-
work. Once the system is as realistic as possible, the 
researchers introduce a variable such as a flu virus, with 
immunization rates increased.
As computers have improved, researchers have begun 
adapting agent-based models to look at sociological and 
behavioral trends that require more computing power 
because of the number of variables they contain. Some 
groups use the technique for crisis modeling, and Austra-
lia has begun intervention studies for child obesity on the 
basis of the findings of an agent-based model.
In response to the opioid epidemic, Bobashev’s group 
has constructed Pain Town—a generic city complete with 
10,000 people suffering from chronic pain, 70 drug deal-
a rate and pattern of spread based on its real-life charac-
teristics. They then run the simulation to test how the 
agents’ behavior shifts when a school is closed or a vacci-
nation campaign is started, repeating it thousands of 
times to determine the likelihood of different outcomes.
In 2015 data from an agent-based model developed at 
the University of Pittsburgh helped California state sena-
tor Richard Pan to gain support for a bill on mandatory 
vaccination in his state. Pan used the simulation to 
demonstrate to his fellow senators how measles out-
breaks could unfold in their home districts. “It certainly 
made an impact on them,” Pan says. “Instead of just 
describing it in more abstract terms, [the model] can 
make it more concrete.” The bill ultimately passed, and 
27

LAW-ENFORCEMENT OFFICIALS seize 33 kilograms 
of heroin and two kilograms of fentanyl in a major drug 
bust in New York State.
DREW ANGERER GETTY IMAGES
different effects in each case.
Such models can also reveal feedback loops, such as the 
link between economic downturns and opioid use. Some 
epidemiological studies have suggested that factors such 
as unemployment tend to predict suicide and addiction, 
especially in white male populations. And addiction can 
lead to further job loss and lower productivity, harming 
the economy. Agent-based models could investigate loops 
such as this, providing ideas for how to mitigate the 
effects, Barrett says.
In May, Bobashev and Ciccarone presented results from 
one of their agent-based models at a meeting of the Inter-
national Society for the Study of Drug Policy in Vancouver, 
B.C. Their findings suggested that the increased preva-
lence of white-powder heroin—a newer form of the drug 
in the U.S.—may increase the risk of HIV spreading among 
injection drug users. The reason, also supported by the 
model, is that unlike black-tar heroin, users do not need to 
heat the drug to dissolve it—and heating kills the virus.
Bobashev and Ciccarone are working on models of how 
younger heroin users begin using the drug. Unlike older 
users, who experienced the rise of the HIV epidemic in 
the 1980s, newer users may be less likely to adopt safe 
ers, 30 doctors, 10 emergency rooms and 10 pharmacies. 
The researchers run the model over five simulated years, 
recording how the situation changes each virtual day.
During this time, the patients’ drug tolerance increas-
es, leading them to find different ways of acquiring drugs. 
Their behavior is driven by variables such as the chance 
that a doctor will increase their prescription or the likeli-
hood that a dealer will have enough heroin. At a  certain 
threshold, patients become addicted or more likely to 
overdose. Bobashev’s early data suggest, for example, that 
requiring doctors to track patients’ medication history 
can be effective over the long term, though not 
immediately.
The model contains many assumptions and simplifica-
tions, Bobashev says. For example, it does not capture 
the fact that the rate at which people develop tolerance 
and addiction can depend on factors such as genetics 
and that whether a person switches from prescription 
drugs to heroin can depend on the relative availability of 
the two drugs.
But researchers can adjust models such as Pain Town to 
test various interventions, such as increasing access to 
emergency rooms, arresting a dealer or equipping police 
with naloxone (a drug that reverses opioid overdoses), to 
see how the system reacts and whether it affects the 
number of deaths over time. And as models become 
more sophisticated, the researchers may be able to incor-
porate more factors, such as people who are not taking 
pain medications but are susceptible to trying opioids for 
the first time.
Models can also be useful for understanding why indi-
vidual places or situations may differ, says Christopher 
Barrett, a computer scientist at Virginia Tech. For instance, 
heroin and fentanyl might be easier to come by in cities 
near ports, whereas doctors may be the main source of 
opioids in a suburban or rural setting. Interventions 
focused on prescribing practices, therefore, would have 
28

After an initial awkward 
period, drug users tend to 
become more honest with 
the researchers, telling 
them crucial information 
such as how they form 
networks with dealers and 
the cost of drugs.
practices. The models suggest that the U.S. may see more 
localized HIV outbreaks, similar to the recent outbreak in 
Scott County, Indiana. That region experienced 181 new 
HIV cases between November 2014 and November 2015, 
compared with fewer than five cases per year previously. 
Opioid use is thought to be the cause. Agent-based mod-
els might help stem future outbreaks by guiding surveil-
lance priorities.
Law-enforcement officials have been seizing vast quan-
tities of heroin and the powerful synthetic drug fentanyl, 
but information on the amount in circulation is hard to 
come by.
One of the most sophisticated agent-based models is 
the University of Pittsburgh’s system, known as FRED (a 
Framework for Reconstructing Epidemiological Dynam-
ics). It fits population census data to maps of geographi-
cal regions around the country, allowing researchers to 
track virtual individuals in the area in a realistic way. It 
was data from these models that helped to convince Pan 
and his fellow state senators to pass legislation on man-
datory vaccination. The FRED team is now beginning to 
use the system for opioid modeling, training it on histor-
ical trends. Pan, who is also a physician, says he is 
intrigued by the prospect. “If there’s a way to actually 
model in different communities which factors would 
have the biggest impact, that would be helpful,” he says.
terns. A number of states have also begun collecting epi-
demiological information on trends in overdose and 
addiction. And research groups such as the University of 
Pittsburgh team are working with multiple health agen-
cies to collate their findings in a single database, which 
can inform FRED and other models.
But no matter how advanced the models become, 
implementing interventions based on their findings is an 
enormous challenge. Models may reveal socioeconomic 
contributors that cannot be easily addressed by policies, 
and politics can stand in the way of proven solutions. Last 
April, Ciccarone had to cancel his work in Charleston, at 
least for the time being, after a needle-exchange clinic 
with which he had been collaborating closed because of 
political pressure. “They were seeing 300 people on a 
Wednesday afternoon because there’s a lot of need,” he 
says. “It’s a huge loss.”
Increasing work is being done to determine the relative 
impact of interventions. Last April the National Institutes 
of Health announced $96 million for a program that will 
partner with health care systems and local governments 
to carry out evidence-based public health interventions in 
different locations, evaluating them as they go. “This is the 
first time this [has been] done for a particular sub-
stance-abuse disorder,” Volkow says. The NIH is now ask-
ing researchers who want to apply for these funds to jus-
tify the size and scope of their proposed studies with data 
from models, including agent-based models.
But these studies are certain to take many years to com-
plete. And Bobashev says that society cannot afford to 
wait for the science to be perfect: “By the time these data 
are collected, tens of thousands, if not hundreds of thou-
sands, more deaths will have occurred.”
DATA DROUGHT
The models face numerous challenges before they will be 
ready for widespread adoption, primarily data gaps. Mar-
shall says that researchers struggle to get access to data 
on opioid prescriptions that are held by manufacturers, 
pharmacies and law-enforcement agencies. It is also diffi-
cult to obtain government information on drug cartels 
and the type and rate of drugs flowing into the country. 
Other data simply do not exist in usable form: agencies 
may record deaths from drug overdose, for instance, but 
fail to specify which drug was responsible.
Observing drug users such as Brandi can provide cer-
tain types of information more quickly and accurately. 
“Drug users know their chemicals intimately,” Cicca-
rone says.
Lee Hoffer, a cultural anthropologist at Case Western 
Reserve University, studies heroin markets and collabo-
rates with Bobashev. He says that the ethnographic data 
that his group and others are collecting could help fill 
some of the information gaps: “We’re trying to enter their 
world as interlopers to see how they see their life.” After an 
initial awkward period, he notes, drug users tend to 
become more honest with the researchers, telling them 
crucial information such as how they form networks with 
dealers and the cost of drugs.
Understanding the psychology of drug users is also cru-
cial, Epstein says. Most decision-making models assume 
rational behaviors. In reality, emotions, misinformation 
and irrational calculations play a major part. “When you 
put them together, you get collections of dynamics that 
are very dysfunctional.”
Epidemiological data may soon be available to buttress 
the models. The CDC and the National Institute on Drug 
Abuse have started several major surveys of drug-use pat-
29

Opinion
Todd Ruppar is John L. and Helen Kellogg Professor of 
Nursing at Rush University and is a Public Voices Fellow of 
The OpEd Project.
OBSERVATIONS
Has Your Health 
Insurance Really 
Got You Covered?
When it comes to making sure patients  
take their medications as prescribed,  
the answer is no
Y
GETTY IMAGES
Over my 20 years as a nurse, I have seen many 
patients struggle to manage medications, often ending 
up hospitalized as a result. In my research, I have found 
ways to identify and help patients better manage their 
medications, but our current health care financing 
model does not reimburse for such care.
Medication nonadherence is estimated to cost the 
U.S. health care system between $100 billion and 
$289 billion in direct costs each year, according to 
research published in the Annals of Internal Medi-
cine. The average total cost of a single heart attack 
ranges from $760,000 to about $1 million per 
person, depending on severity, according to an article 
from the National Business Group on Health 
reported by CBS News.
Research in the journal Stroke reports that total 
costs from a stroke range from $90,981 to 
$228,030, depending on the type of stroke. If we can 
prevent heart attacks and strokes, the savings to 
insurance companies, employers, patients and 
taxpayers is staggering.
We know that many people need help with manag-
our health insurance is paying for the 
wrong things.
According to both the World Health Organi-
zation and the Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention, about 50 percent of people who are 
prescribed medication for long-term health conditions 
such as high blood pressure, high cholesterol or 
diabetes do not take their medications as prescribed. 
The reasons are many and vary from person to 
person, but the result is the same: Many people are 
not getting the health benefits they need from their 
medication, either to maintain or improve their health, 
or to prevent worse health events down the road, such 
as heart attack or stroke. 
As a result, insurers must pay for health care 
providers to deliver behavioral interventions and case 
management to improve adherence to medication 
regimens.
30

Opinion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Comprehensive Coverage 
at Your Fingertips
B U Y  N O W
patients to address the obstacles in the way of 
improving each patient’s health.
To be sure, taking medication when required is not 
the only important behavior for maintaining and 
improving health. While other health behaviors such 
as diet and exercise are important, for most people 
with chronic health problems, adhering to a medica-
tion regimen is going to be the most important health 
behavior for keeping a person out of the hospital (or 
worse). 
While many insurance companies have their own 
care management programs, patients tend to be more 
comfortable working with case managers and nurses 
from their own health care provider’s office. If these 
programs are housed in individual practices, there is 
also better continuity of care and ability to make 
modifications to medication regimens or detect 
changes in health status needing early intervention to 
prevent hospitalization.
Yes, this is a change in how we do things. 
Having insurance companies pay for services that 
don’t fit the traditional model may be seen as radical. 
But the health of our nation and the growing cost of 
our health care system demand new approaches.
There can be no innovations to our health care de-
livery models if there is no change in how insurance 
reimburses for health care services and defines 
what is necessary in health care services. 
It is far better in the short term and the long run to 
pay for proactive care up front for the portion of the 
population that needs it than to have all of society 
paying increased insurance costs to pay for health 
problems we could have prevented.
ing medications for reasons such as forgetfulness, 
complex medication regimens, language barriers, 
inability to obtain medication, or symptoms from health 
conditions, yet health insurers do not provide coverage 
to pay for patients to get the help they need. 
For instance, researchers have developed many 
programs through which health care providers can 
work with patients to improve medication manage-
ment, but without a financial model to pay for it, such 
programs will not reach patients who need it. As one 
example, P. Michael Ho at the Department of Veterans 
Affairs and colleagues have shown that team-based 
approaches do lead to significant improvements in 
how patients use their cardiovascular medications. 
Reimbursing health care organizations for medica-
tion adherence initiatives delivered by providers, such 
as registered nurses, nurse practitioners or pharma-
cists, would improve health outcomes and lower costs 
overall. While this approach would involve up-front 
costs, the result would be a net savings due to 
prevented hospitalizations.
Health care providers typically don’t have time during 
appointments to address whether patients are taking 
medications correctly, and research repeatedly shows 
that patients usually think they’re doing better with 
managing their medications than they actually are. 
Reliant Medical Group, a network of over 500 
health care providers in Massachusetts serving over 
320,000 patients, has also demonstrated how a 
focus on adapting medication regimens to improve 
adherence in high-risk patients can lead to better 
rates of blood pressure control. These approaches 
can work when health care teams are able to devote 
the time and resources needed to partner with 
31

Opinion
Gina Siddiqui is an emergency room doctor at Yale New 
Haven Hospital. Before patching people up in the ER, Gina 
founded and led a digital health company in Silicon Valley 
called Remedy. Follow her on Twitter @zaberdasst.
OBSERVATIONS
Why Doctors 
Reject Tools  
That Make Their 
Jobs Easier
From the thermometer’s invention onward,  
physicians have feared—incorrectly—that new 
technology would make their jobs obsolete
I 
DALE REARDON GETTY IMAGES
want to tell you about a brouhaha in my field 
over a “new” medical discipline 300 years ago. 
Half my fellow doctors thought it weighed them 
down and wanted nothing to do with it. The other 
half celebrated it as a means for medicine to fi-
nally become modern, objective and scientific. The 
discipline was thermometry, and its controversial 
tool a glass tube used to measure body tempera-
ture called a thermometer.
This all began in 1717, when Daniel Fahrenheit 
moved to Amsterdam and offered his newest 
temperature sensor to the Dutch physician 
Herman Boerhaave. Boerhaave tried it out and 
liked it. He proposed using measurements with 
this device to guide diagnosis and therapy.
Boerhaave’s innovation was not embraced. 
Doctors were all for detecting fevers to guide 
diagnosis and treatment, but their determination 
of whether fever was present was qualitative. 
“There is, for example, that acrid, irritating quality 
of feverish heat,” the French physician Jean 
Charles Grimaud said as he scorned the ther-
mometer’s reducing his observations down to 
numbers. “These [numerical] differences are the 
least important in practice.”
Grimaud captured the prevailing view of the 
time when he argued that the physician’s touch 
captured information richer than any tool, and for 
more than 100 years doctors were loath to use 
the glass tube. Researchers among them, 
however, persevered. They wanted to discover 
reproducible laws in medicine, and the verbal 
descriptions from doctors were not getting them 
there. Words were idiosyncratic; they varied from 
doctor to doctor and even for the same doctor 
from day to day. Numbers never wavered.
In 1851 at the Leipzig university hospital in 
Germany, Carl Reinhold Wunderlich started 
32

Opinion
recording temperatures of his patients: 100,000 
cases and several million readings later, he pub-
lished the landmark work “On the Temperature in 
Diseases: a manual of medical thermometry.” His 
text established an average body temperature of 
37 degrees, the variation from this mean which 
could be considered normal, and the cutoff of 38 
degrees as a bona fide fever. Wunderlich’s data 
were compelling; he could predict the course of 
illness better when he defined fever by a number 
than when fever had been defined by feel alone. 
The qualitative status quo would have to change.
Using a thermometer had previously suggested 
incompetence in a doctor. By 1886, not using one 
did. “The information obtained by merely placing 
the hand on the body of the patient is inaccurate 
and unreliable,” remarked the American physician 
Austin Flint. “If it be desirable to count the pulse 
and not trust to the judgment to estimate the 
number of beats per minute, it is far more desirable 
to ascertain the animal heat by means of a heat 
measurer.”
Evidence that temperature signaled disease 
made patient expectations change too. After 
listening to the doctor’s exam and evaluations, a 
patient in England asked, “Doctor, you didn’t try 
the little glass thing that goes in the mouth? Mrs 
Mc__ told me that you would put a little glass 
thing in her mouth and that would tell just where 
the disease was…”
Thermometry was part of a seismic shift in the 
nineteenth century, along with blood tests, micros-
copy, and eventually the x-ray, to what we now 
know as modern medicine. From impressionistic 
illnesses that went unnamed and thus had no 
systematized treatment or cure, modern medicine 
identified culprit bacteria, trialed antibiotics and 
other drugs, and targeted diseased organs or even 
specific parts of organs.
Imagine being a doctor at this watershed 
moment, trained in an old model and staring a new 
one in the face. Your patients ask for blood tests 
and measurements, not for you to feel their skin. 
Would you use all the new technology even if you 
didn’t understand it? Would you continue feeling 
skin, or let the old ways fall to the wayside? And 
would it trouble you, as the blood tests were drawn 
and temperatures taken by the nurse, that these 
tools didn’t need you to report their results. That if 
those results dictated future tests and prescrip-
tions, doctors may as well be replaced completely?
The original thermometers were a foot long, 
available only in academic hospitals, and took 20 
minutes to get a reading. How wonderful that now 
they are cheap and ubiquitous, and that pretty 
much anyone can use one. It’s hard to imagine a 
medical technology whose diffusion has been 
more successful. Even so, the thermometer’s 
takeover has hardly done away with our use for 
doctors. If we have a fever we want a doctor to tell 
us what to do about it, and if we don’t have a fever 
but feel lousy we want a doctor anyway, to figure 
out what’s wrong.
Still, the same debate about technology replacing 
doctors rages on. Today patients want not just the 
doctor’s opinion, but everything from their microbi-
ome array and MRI to tests for their testosterone 
and B12 levels. Some doctors celebrate this 
millimeter and microliter resolution inside patients’ 
bodies. They proudly brandish their arsenal of tests 
and say technology has made medicine the best 
it’s ever been.
The other camp thinks Grimaud was on to 
something. They resent all these tests because 
they miss things that listening to and touching the 
patient would catch. They insist there is more to 
health and disease than what quantitative testing 
shows, and try to limit the tests that are ordered. 
But even if a practiced touch detects things tools 
miss, it is hard to deny that tools also detect things 
we would miss that we don’t want to.
Modern CT scans, for example, perform better 
than even the best surgeons’ palpation of a 
painful abdomen in detecting appendicitis. As CT 
scans become cheaper, faster and dose less radi-
ation, they will become even more accurate. The 
same will happen with genome sequences and 
other up-and-coming tests that detect what 
overwhelms our human senses. There is no hope 
trying to rein in their ascent, nor is it right to. 
Medicine is better off with them around.
What’s keeping some doctors from celebrating 
this miraculous era of medicine is the nagging 
concern that we have nothing to do with its 
triumphs. We are told the machines’ autopilot 
outperforms us so we sit quietly and get weaker, 
yawning and complacent like a mangy tiger in 
captivity. We wish we could do as Grimaud said: 
“distinguishing in feverish heat qualities that 
may be perceived only by a highly practiced 
touch, and which elude whatever means physics 
may offer.”
33

Opinion
Stay up to date on the 
latest in psychology 
and neuroscience
Sign up for our 
Mind & Brain Newsletter
S I G N  U P
have nothing to add in a world of advanced 
technology. They thoughtlessly order tests and 
thoughtlessly obey the results. When, inevitably, 
the tests give unsatisfying answers they shrug 
their shoulders. I wish more of them knew about 
the Philadelphia pediatricians, whose close 
human attention caught mistakes a purely 
numerical rules-driven system would miss.
It’s true that a doctor’s eyes and hands are 
slower, less precise, and more biased than 
modern machines and algorithms. But these 
technologies can count only what they have 
been programmed to count: human perception 
is not so constrained.
Our distractible, rebellious, infinitely curious 
eyes and hands decide moment-by-moment 
what deserves attention. While this leeway can 
lead us astray, with the best of training and 
judgment, it can also lead us to the as of yet un-
discovered phenomena that no existing technol-
ogy knows to look for. My profession and other 
increasingly automated fields would do better to 
focus on finding new answers than on fettering 
old algorithms.
A children’s hospital in Philadelphia tried just 
that. Children often have fevers, as anyone who 
has had children around them well knows. 
Usually, they have a simple cold and there’s not 
much to fuss about. But about once in 1,000 
cases, feverish kids have deadly infections and 
need antibiotics, ICU care, all that modern 
medicine can muster.
An experienced doctor’s judgment picks the 
one-in-1,000 very sick child about three 
quarters of the time. To try to capture the 
remainder of these children being missed, 
hospitals started using quantitative algorithms 
from their electronic health records to choose 
which fevers were dangerous based on hard 
facts alone. And indeed, the computers did 
better catching the serious infections nine 
times out of ten, albeit also with ten times the 
false alarms.
The Philadelphia hospital accepted the 
computer-based list of worrisome fevers, but 
then deployed their best doctors and nurses to 
apply Grimaud’s “highly practiced touch” and 
look over the children before declaring the 
infection was deadly and bringing them into the 
hospital for intravenous medications. Their 
teams were able to weed out the algorithm’s 
false alarms with high accuracy, and in addition 
find cases the computer missed, bringing their 
detection rate of deadly infections from 86.2 
percent by the algorithm alone, to 99.4 percent 
by the algorithm in combination with human 
perception.
Too many doctors have resigned that they 
34

Opinion
Marian W. Wentworth is president and CEO of Management 
Sciences for Health, a global nonprofit that works side by side 
with leaders in low- and middle-income countries to build strong, 
equitable and sustainable health systems that save lives and 
improve health outcomes.
OBSERVATIONS
Viruses on a Plane: 
What Emirates 
Flight EK203 
Teaches Us
We’re good at responding to suspected  
disease outbreaks, but we’re in danger  
of letting down our guard
E
GETTY IMAGES
ven before Emirates flight EK203 arrived in 
New York on September 5, 2018, carrying 
dozens of ill passengers, the crisis response 
was under way. Crew members alerted authorities 
about the sick travelers from the air. Health offi-
cials dispatched an emergency response team 
with mobile diagnostic equipment to the tarmac to 
await the plane’s arrival. Ambulances waited near-
by. EMTs notified hospitals about a potential influx 
of severely ill, potentially infectious patients. And 
after the flight landed, health officials evaluated 
more than 500 passengers at the airport and 
transported at least 10 to a local hospital for fur-
ther testing.
It was an excellent dry run to test our capabili-
ties for fast detection, reporting and interagency 
coordination. Luckily, this happened in the United 
States, a country with significant resources and 
one of the strongest health systems in the world.
But what if an airplane carrying passengers 
harboring an unknown and possibly deadly 
pathogen landed in a country without a robust 
health system? Imagine that these people had 
been forced to stay on the plane, or shuttled 
through a busy airport and sent to an unprotect-
ed hospital ward. If passengers harboring the 
virus but without symptoms then returned home 
to their families or boarded another plane, you’d 
have the beginnings of an epidemic.
Managing a crisis requires authorities on many 
levels to mobilize quickly. While the public sees 
only the flashing lights of an ambulance or 
people with moon suits dispensing treatments 
and vaccines, those of us who work in public 
health see what lies beneath—a web of complex 
protocols and well-maintained equipment and 
35

Opinion
Like us on Facebook 
facebook.com/ScientificAmerican
warned that the next pandemic may be sparked 
by a pathogen we haven’t yet seen, “Disease X,” 
perhaps loitering in a once-hidden cave or 
mutating in a hog pen. The way to fight a new 
disease is the same as it is for a known foe: a co-
ordinated response from a strong health system.
However, we are in danger of letting down our 
guard. Our country’s commitment to preventing 
infectious disease epidemics is weakening. We 
continue to see proposals to scale back funding 
for programs designed to prevent, detect and 
respond to disease threats in the countries where 
they originate. This is a grave mistake. Even as 
one Ebola outbreak in the DRC was ending, 
another more intractable outbreak erupted in a 
conflict zone that is proving harder to contain. 
Failing to make necessary investments now will 
virtually guarantee that a future epidemic will 
cause great human suffering and be economical-
ly disastrous.
We must continue to invest in building strong 
health systems equipped with sufficient resources 
to catch the next deadly pathogen before it has a 
chance to get on an airplane and spread across 
continents. We need to adequately fund CDC 
operations overseas to help countries get and stay 
prepared for worst-case scenarios. And we must 
continue to fund USAID projects that complement 
this work with projects that strengthen gover-
nance and health services around the globe. Only 
then will we be safe to fly.
treatments, strong leadership and skilled health 
workers.
Preparedness doesn’t happen by chance. A 
responsive, resilient health system requires 
commitment and investments of money and time. 
It is important to stop outbreaks both inside our 
country and before they reach our borders. The 
United States engages in thwarting diseases 
overseas through the Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention (CDC) and U.S. Agency 
for International Development (USAID). We 
spend $108.2 million each year through the CDC 
alone on global health security. Activities include 
setting up emergency operations centers to 
manage crises; shoring up leadership and 
regulations; implementing early warning informa-
tion systems; and training clinicians, nurses and 
community health workers on how to spot and 
contain disease. 
These investments pay off. With support from 
the CDC on disease surveillance, border health 
screening, logistics and supplies and community 
engagement, the Democratic Republic of the 
Congo (DRC) was able to contain the outbreak of 
Ebola that began last May. These modest invest-
ments save lives overseas, keep Americans safe 
at home and protect our livelihoods. A pandemic 
would likely crash the U.S. stock market, sending 
the economy into collapse and society into turmoil. 
The World Bank estimates that an epidemic such 
as the 1918 Spanish Flu could cost as much as 5 
percent of the global GDP.
The threat comes from the known and the 
unknown. The World Health Organization has 
36

Opinion
Sameena Rahman is an obstetrician-gynecologist,  
clinical assistant professor at Northwestern University’s 
Feinberg School of Medicine and a Public Voices Fellow  
with The OpEd Project.
VOICES
Addressing 
Cultural Bias  
in Medicine
We must overcome our inherent  
prejudices if we want to offer the  
best health care for all
CECILIE ARCURS GETTY IMAGES
“What’s the deal with your people?”
As a second-year South Asian–American 
Muslim OB/GYN resident in training, I looked up 
through my scrub mask at the Caucasian female 
attending physician with whom I was operating 
as she asked this question.
I had an idea what she was referring to. I had 
overheard her complain earlier about a laboring 
patient while she was scrubbing with the other 
Caucasian attending who was operating in the 
room next door.
“She acts as if she has never had anything in her 
vagina, but clearly she has.”
The physician was referring to this recently 
immigrated South Asian patient, Aisha (name 
changed to protect patient identity), who was like 
many women I had been asked to examine: She 
was meek and, like any other woman in her first 
labor, she was scared and uncomfortable.
This patient had a small introitus, or opening to 
the vagina, and had a difficult pelvic exam with an 
inability to relax her legs during the exam. She had 
always had pain with intercourse but revealed that 
she had been told this was normal.
Now, 15 years later, looking back with more 
knowledge and expertise, I see that this patient 
clearly had hypertonic pelvic floor muscles second-
ary to anxiety and fear. This resulted in vaginismus, 
or a tightening of the muscles of the vagina 
preventing entry, and it is likely she had a condition 
called provoked vestibulodynia, or a type of nerve 
pain at the entry of the vagina when it is touched.
I would encounter many “Aishas” during my 
residency, and I always felt like the attending 
physicians involved would begrudgingly take care 
of “my people.” Yes, their pelvic exams were difficult, 
and each patient took extra time. But I found many 
of them did not receive the empathy and cultural 
sensitivity they needed in their health care delivery.
Many of the patients were from a culture of 
deference to the physician, so although they may 
have been uncomfortable, they went along with 
37
37

Opinion
whatever the doctor said. As a young resident, I 
never felt comfortable with the stereotype but also 
did not feel brave enough to say anything to these 
physicians—who were mostly Caucasian.
Regardless of ethnicity or culture, all physicians 
need to be aware of their inherent racial and 
gender-based biases and how these may impact 
managing women’s sexual health issues and 
sexual dysfunction. They should also be aware of 
the cultural stigmas associated with sexual health 
and practices of their patient base in order to 
improve health care delivery.
For instance, sexual health topics such as 
intercourse, infections and even menstruation are 
still taboo in certain cultures, such as South Asian 
communities, Arab communities, native African 
communities and some conservative religious 
communities whether they be Muslim, Hindu, 
Jewish or Christian.
Women are less likely to address these issues of 
concern given their culture of origin. And even if 
they were, if a clinician approaches these patients 
with deep patriarchal perspectives or privileged 
bias, the patient may be less likely to discuss it with 
the clinician. In fact, some studies have demon-
strated that health care providers’ lack of cultural 
competence compounded with patients’ beliefs has 
resulted in some American Muslim women not 
seeking cervical cancer screening or breast cancer 
screening at the same rates as other women.
Some physicians have become aware of their 
own privilege and bias when it comes to both their 
career advancements and patient care. In a recent 
article in the Annals of Family Medicine, Max J. 
Romano, a Caucasian male doctor at the Johns 
Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, says 
he had opportunities in his career and advance-
ments he attributes to white privilege. He also 
discussed how racial stereotypes and bias have 
interfered in patient care, health care outcomes 
and life expectancy.
For instance, studies demonstrate that clini-
cians prescribe less pain medication to Afri-
can-Americans than to their Caucasian counter-
parts for the same medical conditions.  This is 
also attributed to racial stereotypes and pain 
responses of different races.
I take care of many women of color with chronic 
pelvic and sexual pain conditions. Many tell me they 
have never felt heard or adequately responded to 
by other physicians. Serena Williams recently 
claimed her race was a factor when she almost 
died due to postpartum complications of a pulmo-
nary embolus (blood clot in her lungs) despite 
repeatedly explaining her symptoms to her health 
care team.  
As a brown girl growing up in the South, I was 
subjected to a significant amount of racism. I 
always imagined that, once I had attended elite 
universities, then medical school and started 
practicing medicine, I would be less likely to see it 
and would be immune to it.
Working as a Muslim physician in the post-9/11 
era, there were many times I would hear blatant 
racist statements or even subtle ones—such as 
during Ramadan when fasting—from certain 
patients and even from attending physicians.
Whether it was a joke about terrorism, discus-
sions about “towelheads” or opinions about female 
patients, their pelvic exams or their status, these 
comments were often made with minimal remorse.
It has become apparent that gender biases and 
sexual harassment are endemic in our culture. 
Many clinicians are also biased against women who 
come forward with sexual complaints. As physi-
cians, each of us needs be aware of his or her own 
biases in order to serve patients with the promise 
made during the Hippocratic Oath.
I own and operate a gynecology practice in 
Chicago; one of my specialties is treating patients 
with sexual dysfunction. “My people” tend to flock 
to me for their care and management.
Perhaps it is because of my background, 
cultural competence and experience, but I do 
know what’s “the deal” is with “my people.” I like 
to believe that having been brought up with 
egalitarian principles and a general calling to 
serve those in need, I am able to deliver unbiased 
health care equally to my patients. 
This is not an indictment of the entire health care 
system. It is not broken when it comes to equality in 
health care delivery. But inherent biases impact 
how physicians perceive patients. Representation 
matters. Knowing there are like-minded medical 
professionals is a start. Empathy and goodwill 
toward all races and socioeconomic backgrounds 
cannot always be taught to individuals. Being aware 
of the discrimination and stereotypes is a stepping 
stone to breaking these barriers in health care.
That way every patient can best be served, 
regardless if her physician happens to be one of 
her own people.
38

Follow us on Twitter
Health&
      Medicine
@sciam
twitter.com/sciam
LETTERS TO THE EDITOR:
Scientific American, 1 New York Plaza, Suite 4600, New York, NY 
10004-1562, 212-451-8200 or editors@sciam.com.  
Letters may be edited for length and clarity. We regret that we  
cannot answer each one.
HOW TO CONTACT US:
For Advertising Inquiries: Scientific American, 1 New York Plaza, Suite 
4600, New York, NY 10004-1562, 212-451-8893, fax: 212-754-1138 
For Subscription Inquiries: U.S and Canada: 888-262-5144, Outside 
North America: Scientific American, PO Box 5715, Harlan IA 51593, 
515-248-7684, www.ScientificAmerican.com
For Permission to Copy or Reuse Material From Scientific American: 
Permissions Department, Scientific American, 1 New York Plaza, Suite 
4600, New York, NY 10004-1562, 212-451-8546,  
www.ScientificAmerican.com/permissions. Please allow three to six 
weeks for processing.
Editor in Chief and Senior Vice President: Mariette DiChristina
Managing Editor: Curtis Brainard
Collections Editor: Andrea Gawrylewski
Chief Features Editor: Seth Fletcher
Chief News Editor: Dean Visser
Chief Opinion Editor: Michael D. Lemonick
Creative Director: Michael Mrak
Art Director: Lawrence R. Gendron
Photography Editor: Monica Bradley
Assistant Photo Editor: Liz Tormes
Copy Director: Maria-Christina Keller
Senior Copy Editors: Michael Battaglia, Daniel C. Schlenoff
Copy Editors: Aaron Shattuck, Kevin Singer
Prepress and Quality Manager: Silvia De Santis
Technical Lead: Nicholas Sollecito
Senior Web Producer: Ian Kelly
Editorial Administrator: Ericka Skirpan
Senior Secretary: Maya Harty
Copyright © 2019 by Scientific American, a division of Nature America, 
Inc. All rights reserved.
President: Dean Sanderson
Executive Vice President: Michael Florek
Vice President, Commercial: Andrew Douglas
Head, Marketing and Product Management: Richard Zinken
Marketing and Customer Service Coordinator: Christine Kaelin
Rights and Permissions Manager: Felicia Ruocco
Head of Communications, USA: Rachel Scheer
 
Scientific American is part of Springer Nature, which owns or has
commercial relations with thousands of scientific publications  
(many of them can be found at www.springernature.com/us).
Scientific American maintains a strict policy of editorial  
independencein reporting developments in science to our readers.
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims  
in published maps and institutional affiliations.
39


