BIOCHEMISTRY
New and
Improved
Life,
Natural proteins do everything for us. Now scientists have 
learned to create articial ones—a feat that has yielded  
a new COVID vaccine and could revolutionize biology 
By Rowan Jacobsen 
Photographs by Timothy Archibald
July 2021, ScienticAmerican.com 29
© 2021 Scientific American

       2020,       
 laboratory at the University of Washington, waiting nervously for 
the results of the most important experiment of her life. Walls, a 
young structural biologist with expertise in coronaviruses, had spent 
the past three months working day and night to develop a new kind 
of vaccine against the pathogen ravaging the world. She hoped that 
her approach, if successful, might not only tame  COVID but also rev-
olutionize the eld of vaccinology, putting us on a path to defeat infectious diseases from u to HIV. 
Unlike any vaccine used before, the vaccine Walls was developing was not derived from compo-
nents found in nature. It consisted of articial microscopic proteins drawn up on a computer, and 
their creation marked the beginning of an extraordinary leap in our ability to redesign biology. 
L
Walls suspected a coronavirus. On January 10, 2020, 
the genetic sequence for SARS-CoV-2 was released to 
the world. Walls and biochemist David Veesler, the 
head of her lab at the University of Washington, stayed 
up all night analyzing it. Walls says she felt an over-
whelming sense of focus: “It was like, ‘Okay, we know 
what to do,’” she says. “ ‘Let’s go do it.’” 
L
Proteins are intricate nanomachines that perform 
most tasks in living things by constantly interacting 
with one another. They digest food, ght invaders, 
repair damage, sense their surroundings, carry sig-
nals, exert force, help create thoughts, and replicate. 
They are made of long strings of simpler molecules 
called amino acids, and they twist and fold into enor-
mously complex 3-D structures. Their origamilike 
shapes are governed by the order and number of the 
dierent aminos used to build them, which have dis-
tinct attractive and repellent forces. The complexity 
of those interactions is so great and the scale so small 
(the average cell contains 42 million proteins) that
we have never been able to gure out the rules gov-
erning how they spontaneously and dependably con-
tort from strings to things. Many experts assumed we 
never would. 
But new insights and breakthroughs in articial 
intelligence are coaxing, or forcing, proteins to give 
up their secrets. Scientists are now forging biochem-
ical tools that could transform our world. With these 
tools, we can use proteins to build nanobots that can 
engage infectious diseases in single-particle combat, 
or send signals throughout the body, or dismantle 
toxic molecules like tiny repo units, or harvest light. 
We can create biology with purpose. 
Walls is at the forefront of this research. She com-
pleted her doctorate in coronavirus structure in Decem-
ber 2019, making her a member of what was at the time
a very small club. “For ve years I’d been trying to con-
vince people that coronaviruses were important,” she 
says. “At my Ph.D. defense, I began by saying, ‘I’m about 
to tell you why this family of viruses has the potential 
to cause a pandemic, and we are not prepared for that 
pandemic.’ Unfortunately, that ended up coming true.” 
As soon as word of a mysterious new pneumonia 
trickled out of Wuhan, China, in late December 2019, 
  ,  SARS-CoV-2 resem-
bles a ball covered in protein “spikes.” Each 
spike ends in a cluster of amino acids—a sec-
tion of the protein known as the receptor-binding 
domain, or RBD—whose alignment and atomic charg-
es pair perfectly with a protein on the surface of 
human cells. The viral protein docks at the receptor 
like a spacecraft, and the virus uses this connection to 
slip inside the cell and replicate.
Because of its dangerous role, the RBD is the pri-
mary target of the immune system’s antibodies. They, 
too, are proteins, created by the body to bind to the 
RBD and take it out of commission. But it takes a 
while for specialized cells to manufacture enough 
eective antibodies, and by that time the virus has 
often done considerable damage. 
The rst-generation  COVID vaccines, including the 
mRNA vaccines that have been such lifesavers, work by 
introducing the virus’s spike into the body, without a 
functional coronavirus attached, so the immune system 
can learn to recognize the RBD and rally its troops. But
the RBD is periodically hidden by other parts of the 
spike protein, shielding the domain from antibodies 
looking to bind to it. This blunts the immune response. 
In addition, a free-oating spike protein does not resem-
ble a natural virus and does not always trigger a strong 
reaction unless a large dose of vaccine is used. That big 
dose increases costs and can trigger strong side eects.
As successful as the  COVID vaccines have been, 
Rowan Jacobsen is a
journalist and authorof
several books, such as
Shadows on the Gulf
(Bloomsbury, 2011) and
Trufe Hound (Blooms-
bury, 2021). His many
magazine articles include
“The Invulnerable Cell”
in Scientic American’s
July 2019 issue and “Ghost
Flowers,” published in
February of that year. He
was a 2017–2018 Knight
Science Journalism Fellow
at the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology.
30 Scientic American, July 2021
© 2021 Scientific American

VACCINE DEVELOPERS Lexi Walls (left) and Brooke Fiala (right) used custom-crafted proteins to create a promising new COVID inoculation.
It waves a vulnerable part of the SARS-CoV-2 virus in front of immune system cells, provoking a strong neutralizing response.
July 2021, ScienticAmerican.com 31
© 2021 Scientific American

But nobody knew whether that would really hap-
pen. So on that April Friday last year, as Walls waited 
for results, she had her ngers crossed. Three weeks
earlier she and her colleagues had injected some mice 
with the nanoparticle vaccine. Other mice got the 
plain spike that other vaccines were using. Now the 
researchers had drawn blood from the mice and mixed 
it with a SARS-CoV-2 pseudovirus, an articial, non-
replicating version of the virus that is safer to use in 
labs. The idea was to see whether any vaccinated mice 
had developed antibodies that would home in on and 
neutralize the pseudovirus. 
It takes a while for antibodies to do their thing, 
which is why Walls had to wait until late that Friday 
night. No way was she going home to be kept in sus-
pense all weekend. Her colleagues had wished her good 
luck as they headed out the door. Before Veesler cut out, 
he asked her to contact him as soon as she had results. 
Now it was dark outside, and the lab was ghostly
quiet. It was nally time to look. Walls red up a lab 
instrument that could detect and count antibodies 
attached to virus particles, took a deep breath and 
peeked at the numbers. 
Some mice had been given a low dose of the plain 
spike, and that was a total failure: zero eect on the 
pseudoviruses. Mice given a high dose of the spike 
showed antibodies with a moderate neutralizing 
eect, similar to what some other vaccines had pro-
duced. But in mice that got the nanoparticle vaccine, 
the pseudovirus was completely outmatched. Anti-
bodies smothered it and had 10 times the neutraliz-
ing eect of the large-dose spike preparation. That 
magnitude held even when only a minuscule dose was 
used. Walls was looking at something that could be a 
low-cost, shelf-stable, ultrapotent vaccine.
Walls red o an all-caps text message to Veesler: 
“THEY’RE NEUTRALIZING!” 
Veesler wrote right back: “The next generation of 
coronavirus vaccines is in your hands!” 
That was only the rst of several tests the vaccine 
had to pass. From there they would have to prove the 
vaccine could oer protection from the live virus in 
mice, nonhuman primates and, nally, people. The 
nanoparticles entered that last testing phase early in 
2021. But at that moment, as an em blem of the power 
of protein design, it was already a success—the clear-
est sign yet that a technology long beyond our grasp 
had suddenly arrived. We were learning to sculpt the 
living clay from which we are all made. 
A
  as the genetics revolution
of the past decades has been, at its heart has 
always been a mystery: proteins. A gene is sim-
ply the code for making a single protein. In that gene, 
a set of three DNA nucleotides, represented by letters, 
yields one amino acid, and another triplet codes for 
a dierent amino acid. There are 20 amino acids that 
a cell can use as protein-building blocks, and each 
one has a unique shape and function. Some are more 
many experts see inoculations based on natural pro-
teins as an interim technology. “It’s becoming clear 
that just delivering natural or stabilized proteins is
not sucient,” says Rino Rappuoli, chief scientist and 
head of vaccine development at U.K.-based pharma-
ceutical giant GlaxoSmithKline. Most current vac-
cines, from childhood inoculations to adult u shots, 
involve such natural proteins, which vaccinologists 
call immunogens; GSK makes a lot of them. “We need 
to design immunogens that are better than natural 
molecules,” Rappuoli says. 
Walls and Veesler had an idea. What if, instead of a 
whole spike, the immune system were presented with 
just the RBD tip, which would not have any shield to 
hide behind? “We wanted to put the key component 
on display,” Walls says, “to say, ‘Hey, im mune system, 
this is where you want to react!’” 
The immediate trouble with that notion was that 
biology does not make isolated RBDs, and the seg-
ment on its own would be too small and unfamiliar to 
get the immune system’s attention. But Walls and Vee-
sler knew some people who could help them solve that 
problem. Just up the street from them was the Bell 
Labs of protein invention, the University of Washing-
ton’s Institute for Protein Design (IPD). The institute 
had learned enough about protein folding to design 
and build a few hundred very simple, small proteins—
unlike any that have ever been found in a living organ-
ism—that would fold into consistent shapes with pre-
dictable functions. 
In 2019 a group in the IPD led by biochemist Neil 
King had designed two tiny proteins with complemen-
tary interfaces that, when mixed together in solution, 
would snap together and self-assemble into nano-
particles. These balls were about the size of a virus
and were completely customizable through a simple 
change to their genetic code. When the scientists fes-
tooned the particles with 20 protein spikes from the 
respiratory syncytial virus, the second-leading cause 
of infant mortality worldwide, they triggered an 
impressive immune response in early tests. 
Why not try a similar nanoparticle core for a SARS-
CoV-2 vaccine, Walls and Veesler thought, using just 
the RBD instead of an entire spike? As a bonus, the 
protein-based nanoparticle would be cheap and fast 
to produce compared with vaccines that use killed or 
weakened virus. It would also be stable at room tem-
perature and easy to deliver to people, unlike fragile 
mRNA vaccines that must be kept in a deep freeze. 
Walls reached out to the IPD and collaborated with 
nanoparticle specialist Brooke Fiala, who worked with
King, on a prototype—a nanoparticle sphere display-
ing 60 copies of the RBD. The scientists also tried 
something radical: Instead of fusing the RBDs direct-
ly to the surface of the nanoparticle, they tethered 
them with short strings of amino acids, like kites. Giv-
ing the RBDs a little bit of play could allow the immune 
system to get a better look at every angle and produce 
antibodies that would attack many dierent spots. 
32 Scientic American, July 2021
© 2021 Scientific American


TO BLOCK A VIRUS, Longxing Cao of the Institute for Protein Design developed small synthetic proteins called mini binders. They glom
on to the part of a coronavirus that attaches to cells, stopping it. Mini binders could be sprayed up the nose to prevent infections.
34 Scientic American, July 2021
© 2021 Scientific American

founded the IPD—where Walls and Veesler went to get 
their nanoparticles—have been able to deduce a few of 
these basic rules. Baker’s group has incorporated these
rubrics into a structure-predicting computer program 
called Rosetta and used them to make a number of 
small proteins, typically a few dozen amino acids in size. 
Some of their successes have shown the great potential 
of the eld: microscopic “nanocages” that could be used 
to package drugs and transport them into the body and 
molecular detectors that go o when they encounter 
cells with specic combinations of amino acids on their 
surface, indicating such cells are cancerous. 
But most important proteins in living things are 
much bigger than these examples and contain thou-
sands of amino acids, each of which interacts with up 
to a dozen neighbors, some forming bonds as strong 
as those in a diamond, some pushing others away. All 
those relationships morph depending on proximity. So 
the possibilities quickly become astronomical, and the
formulas for guring out the nal structures have long 
eluded our best minds and supercomputers. 
Frustrated by this problem back in 1994, a group of 
computational biologists decided that a little friendly 
competition might spur some progress. Led by John 
Moult of the University of Maryland, they launched 
CASP, the Critical Assessment of Structure Prediction 
contest. Moult obtained detailed specs of proteins 
whose structure had been recently identied but not 
released. He sent the genetic se quence for the proteins 
to various teams from dierent research labs, which 
then submitted their best ideas about what the nished 
protein looked like. 
Those predictions were scored on their similarity 
to the actual structure based on the percentage of mol-
ecules in the right place. Getting the basic architecture
right might score a 50, getting the angles and links 
between the main parts might be good for a 70, and 
nailing the tiny molecular threads that sprout o pro-
teins like hairs would merit a 90-plus. 
Moult has been running the contest every two 
years since then. For a long time not even the best 
teams could do much better than guesswork. In 2012, 
the year Baker’s protein design institute started up, 
the very best CASP teams were averaging scores in the 
low 20s, and there had been no improvement for a 
decade. “There were moments after some CASPs 
where I’d see the results and despair,” Moult says. “I’d 
think, ‘This is all a joke. Why are we even doing this?’” 
Some new in  sights led to a rise at CASP11, with the 
best scores averaging nearly 30, and another slight 
bump to around 40 at CASP12.
Then came CASP13 in 2018. The best teams, led by 
Baker’s institute, improved again, averaging nearly 50, 
but they were bested by a surprise entrant: Google’s 
DeepMind, whose articial-intelligence system had 
trounced the world’s best Go player in 2017. The AI 
averaged a score of about 57 per protein. 
That result rocked the world’s protein-engineering 
labs, but it turned out to be just a dress rehearsal for 
2020. In that year DeepMind’s predictions were spot-
on. “I thought, ‘This can’t be right. Let’s wait for the 
next one,’” Moult says. “And they just kept coming.”
DeepMind averaged a 92 for all proteins. On the 
easier ones, it had virtually every atom in the right 
place. But its most impressive results were on some 
exceedingly dicult proteins that completely stymied 
most teams. On one molecule, no group scored high-
er than the 20s—DeepMind scored in the high 80s. 
Moult was stunned by the results. “I spent a lot of 
my career on this,” he says. “I never thought we’d get 
this level of atomic accuracy.” Most impressive, he says, 
is the indication that DeepMind has picked up on pre-
viously unknown fundamentals. “It’s not just pattern 
recognition. In some alien way, the machine ‘under-
stands’ the physics and can calculate how the atoms in 
a unique arrangement of amino acids are going to 
arrange themselves.” 
“It was shocking,” agrees structural biologist and
CASP competitor Mohammed AlQuraishi of Columbia 
University. “Never in my life had I expected to see a sci-
entic advance so rapid.” AlQuraishi expects the 
breakthrough to transform the biological sciences. 
The DeepMind team is expected to publish its 
methods paper, with details about how it worked, lat-
er this year. Some aspects may remain inscrutable—
the AI picks up on faint relationships that cannot eas-
ily be explained with rules—but at the moment, scien-
tists do have the general outlines. 
To predict amino acids’ eects on one another, the 
machine’s programmers invoked a technique called 
attention that has been responsible for recent leaps 
forward in accurate language translation by AIs. Like 
proteins, language is a seemingly linear string of 
information that folds back on itself to produce mean-
ing. A word such as “it” might draw its signicance 
from a word used in an entirely dierent sentence. 
(“For the longest time, AI made no sense to me. And 
then, after much reading, I nally understood it.”) 
When we communicate, we are constantly moving 
backward and forward along this linear string, pay-
ing attention to one local cluster of words to under-
stand what a dierent word means in context. Once 
we have that meaning resolved, we can move to 
another, related passage and understand those words 
in light of the new information. 
DeepMind does something like this for proteins, 
focusing its attention on one local cluster of amino 
acids, understanding as much as it can about their 
relation to one another. Some pairs of aminos, for 
example, appear to have coevolved, indicating a bond
between them and limiting their possible positions 
in the protein. DeepMind uses this information to 
leap to a dierent part of the protein and analyze that 
section in light of what it knows about the rst clus-
ter. It carries out multiple iterations across all parts 
of the protein string and eventually uses this infor-
mation to build a 3-D cloud of points that represents 
the relations among all the atomic constituents of 
July 2021, ScienticAmerican.com 35
© 2021 Scientific American

every amino. It basically treats protein folding like a 
new, alien language to be deciphered. 
As other labs incorporate DeepMind’s techniques
and on-point protein prediction becomes ubiquitous, 
AlQuraishi says, the lengthy trial-and-error period of 
getting a real-world protein to fold like you thought it 
would will become much faster. “It will percolate every-
where,” he says. “It’s going to make protein design 
much more eective.” 
But the DeepMind team is not in the business of 
applied science, so the AI will not spend its time 
churning out blueprints for complicated protein con-
struction on demand. Its big contribution will be indi-
rect. “Their work shines light on the power of proteins 
and the bright future of engineering new ones,” says 
California Institute of Technology biochemist Frances 
Arnold, who won the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 2018 
for improving the performance of natural proteins 
through a method called directed evolution. “But they
have not solved the problem of designing or engineer-
ing proteins to solve problems for people.” 
That work will fall to the Arnolds and Bakers of the 
A vaccine that is easy to produce,  
that protects against mutant viruses 
that may emerge, may be exactly  
the solution the world needs. 
world, who are trying to use DeepMind’s techniques to
supercharge their labs’ abilities to sculpt proteins. “It’s 
a big breakthrough,” says Baker, whose team again n-
ished a distant second in the competition. “I think it will 
make what’s already working well work even better.” 
R
   there is an enormous problem for 
people, to use Arnold’s phrase, that is wracking 
the world. That problem is  COVID. When it hit, 
Baker and others in his lab looked to proteins for solu-
tions. They plugged the genetic sequence for the coro-
navirus into Rosetta, their protein-structure-predic-
tion computer program, to produce a 3-D model, then 
pored over it for weaknesses like Rebel pilots plotting 
an assault on the Death Star. As Walls did, they zeroed 
in on the spike’s RBD. But instead of making a vaccine 
to trigger antibody production, Baker wanted to build
a better antibody. He wanted a protein whose sole pur-
pose was to ensnare the RBD like microscopic Velcro. 
Amazing as they are, antibodies are not perfect. The 
body cannot custom-design an antibody in advance for 
a pathogen it has never seen, so it makes a lot of dier-
ent versions. When a new invader shows up, immune 
system cells make many copies of whatever antibody 
binds best, but the t is not always tight enough to stop 
the pathogen. Natural antibodies are also relatively big 
proteins that are not always able to get their business 
end snug against a virus’s RBD.
Enter the “mini binders,” as Baker calls them. These 
are small synthetic proteins that can be designed ami-
no acid by amino acid to t precisely against a virus’s 
RBD. With no extraneous bits, they bind more tightly. 
And they are small and lightweight enough to be 
administered through a spritz up the nose rather than 
an injection into the arm. No needles! 
Baker’s dream was to create a medication rather 
than a vaccine: a nasal spray that could be used at the 
rst sign of infection—or beforehand as daily preven-
tion—to ood the nose with a mist of mini binders 
that would coat the RBDs of virus particles before 
they could attach to anything. It would have the long 
shelf life of a bag of dried lentils, and it could be 
quickly reformulated for any new pathogen and 
rushed into the hands of health-care workers, teach-
ers and anyone else on the front lines—a kind of 
designer-driven immune system for civilization. 
To engineer the mini binder, Longxing Cao, a post-
doc in Baker’s lab who headed 
the project, scouted the virus 
RBD’s structure, comparing it 
with the library of tiny proteins 
the institute had previously de -
signed and looking for comple-
mentary shapes. Like a rock 
climber on a challenging face, 
the mini binder needed to be 
small enough to wriggle into 
the cleft where the RBD lay, 
and it needed to be shaped so 
that it could get rm handholds and toeholds in the
right places. Cao cataloged where the RBD’s amino 
acids made patches of positive electrical charges, 
patches of negative charges and hydrophobic (water-
hating) patches, then tailored mini binders to have as 
many complementary patches as possible. He tested 
millions of possibilities on Rosetta. 
The best designs were made of three helixes con-
nected like sausage links by short strings of amino 
acids. Each mini binder was about 60 amino acids 
long in total—less than a tenth the size of an antibody 
and a twentieth the size of a coronavirus spike. 
Then, of course, Cao had to take his protein from 
Rosetta to the real world. Amazingly, that process has 
become trivially easy. DNA—the As, Cs, Gs and Ts of the 
genetic code—can be printed for pennies on devices that 
resemble inkjet printers. Cao printed DNA strands with
the sequence for his mini binder and inserted them into 
yeast, which, like programmable livestock, pumped 
out those tiny proteins along with their normal ones. 
He then harvested the proteins and tested them. 
The top mini binder bound the virus six times 
more eectively than the best antibodies known—
better than any molecule on the planet, in fact, form-
ing dozens of strong bonds with the RBD. It was 
36 Scientic American, July 2021
© 2021 Scientific American

extraordinarily stable, and it sprayed easily out of a 
nozzle. Hamsters given a snootful became immune 
to COVID. “I was denitely excited,” Cao says, “but
not totally surprised.” Researchers expect clinical tri-
als for mini binders to start later in 2021, and a num-
ber of labs around the world are now exploring oth-
er ways that mini proteins might help the body func-
tion or ward o illness. 
Although there is great optimism about the tech-
nology, some biosecurity researchers have expressed 
concerns about proteins that could be designed for 
nefarious purposes. Prions, for example, which are 
responsible for “mad cow” and other neurodegenera-
tive diseases, are misfolded proteins that cause other 
proteins to misfold in turn, triggering deadly chain 
reactions that are transmissible; they could be deliv-
ered by aerosol. The Biological Weapons Convention, 
which virtually all nations have signed, eectively bans 
the development or use of pathogen-based bioweap-
ons, but no one ever thought to extend it to address 
proteins that were never part of an organism. 
“This is a real concern,” says biosecurity expert 
Filippa Lentzos of King’s College London, “because 
potential future biological weapons won’t necessarily 
make us sick using pathogens.” Synthetic mini pro-
teins may or may not fall under the control of the con-
vention, she says, “so legal status is an important issue.” 
But engineered mini proteins are also an extreme-
ly unlikely threat, Lentzos says, and quite low on her 
list of worries: “If you want to cause harm, why would 
you turn to something as sophisticated and complicat-
ed as protein design? There are plenty of more acces-
sible things in nature you could use.” Naturally occur-
ring toxins and pathogens are ready-made and all over 
the place. If you really want to hurt people, there are
easier ways. 
A
additional ninefold, add a booster and get equally good 
results.) In January of this year the vaccine began ear-
ly clinical trials in Washington State and South Korea.
Yet even as those trials were progressing, the virus 
was spawning a new wave of variants with the ability 
to evade some of the antibodies triggered by the rst 
generation of vaccines. So Walls went back to work, 
designing a new and improved nanoparticle. Instead 
of copies of just the SARS-CoV-2 RBD, this version had 
a mosaic of four dierent RBDs: some from SARS-
CoV-2, some from the original SARS virus from the ear-
ly 2000s and some from two other coronaviruses. This 
broad spectrum of RBDs elicited a robust antibody 
response against all coronaviruses tested, including 
the most elusive of the variants. 
A vaccine that is eective in tiny doses, that is easy 
and inexpensive to produce, that does not require 
refrigeration and that protects against a bunch of 
mutant viruses, including ones that may emerge in the
future, could be exactly the solution the world needs. 
These advantages have drawn the attention of the 
world’s vaccine heavyweights, including GSK’s Rap-
puoli. “There is no question that our immune system
likes nanoparticles,” he says. “These represent the best 
option we have.” In a recent commentary in the jour-
nal  Cell,  Rappuoli predicted that such designer mole-
cules will usher in a new era of vaccines: “From here, 
the sky is the limit.” 
And the capability will not end with vaccines. In 
this new Amino Age, the ability to intelligently design 
nanomachines at an atomic scale could turn ghting 
every disease into an engineering exercise. “When we 
tackle problems involving any sort of protein, we need 
to have this in mind,” Walls says. “We need to look at 
the protein and know that we can engineer solutions.
Every day there are new successes coming.” 
Some of those successes will come in areas other 
than medicine, such as materials science. The IPD has 
invented proteins that self-assemble into microscop-
ic honeycomb grids that attract mineral deposition, a 
new way to produce ecient superconductors and 
batteries. Another project is crafting proteins that har-
vest light, as do photosynthetic proteins in plants, and 
convert that energy into electricity and fuel.
As the Amino Age tool kit grows, the natural pro-
teins we now use for help—insulin for people with 
diabetes, for instance—may come to seem as archaic 
as the sharpened rocks our Stone Age ancestors once 
used. By the same token, our current designer pro-
teins, as exciting as they are, are just sundials and 
wagon wheels. The features of a future landscape
lled with bespoke molecules are beyond conception. 
But like the new proteins themselves, those features 
will, eventually and elegantly, fold into shape. 
F R O M O U R A R C H I V E S
Engineering Life: Building a FAB for Biology. David Baker et al.; June 2006.
s c i e n t i f i c a m e r i c a n . c o m /m a g a z i n e /s a
  ,  the helpful types of de novo pro-
teins are attracting an increasing amount of 
scientic energy and expertise, and the mole-
cules may be coming to a clinic near you. As most of 
the world’s nearly eight billion people await a  COVID 
vaccine, Walls’s nano particle is looking like a prom-
ising candidate.
After successfully neutralizing the pseudovirus in 
mouse cells, the vaccine’s next big test was against the 
real coronavirus. For that, Walls had to ship her mice 
to the University of North Carolina lab of Ralph S. Bar-
ic, one of the world’s foremost coronavirus research-
ers. The facility has the biosecurity level required to 
work with the live virus. Baric and his colleagues see
many vaccine candidates, so in June  2020 Walls was 
pleased to get an encouraging e-mail from them: the 
neutralizing power of the nanoparticle vaccine was o 
the charts—higher than anything they had tested. 
“Everything worked better than we’d hoped!” Walls 
says. When exposed to the real virus, the mice did well. 
“Completely protected. No sign of illness.” (Later Walls 
found that she could reduce the already low dose an 
July 2021, ScienticAmerican.com 37
© 2021 Scientific American



