See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/50410801
Structure and Classification of Viruses
Chapter · January 1996
Source: PubMed
CITATIONS
140
READS
234,384
1 author:
Hans R. Gelderblom
Robert Koch Institut
291 PUBLICATIONS   11,781 CITATIONS   
SEE PROFILE
All content following this page was uploaded by Hans R. Gelderblom on 20 May 2015.
The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.

Page 1 of 14
Medmicro Chapter 41
Structure and Classification of 
Viruses  
Hans R. Gelderblom  
General Concepts 
Structure and Function  
Viruses are small obligate intracellular parasites, which by definition contain either a RNA or DNA genome surrounded 
by a protective, virus-coded protein coat. Viruses may be viewed as mobile genetic elements, most probably of cellular 
origin and characterized by a long co-evolution of virus and host. For propagation viruses depend on specialized host 
cells supplying the complex metabolic and biosynthetic machinery of eukaryotic or prokaryotic cells. A complete virus 
particle is called a virion. The main function of the virion is to deliver its DNA or RNA genome into the host cell so that 
the genome can be expressed (transcribed and translated) by the host cell. The viral genome, often with associated basic 
proteins, is packaged inside a symmetric protein capsid. The nucleic acid-associated protein, called nucleoprotein, 
together with the genome, forms the nucleocapsid. In enveloped viruses, the nucleocapsid is surrounded by a lipid 
bilayer derived from the modified host cell membrane and studded with an outer layer of virus envelope glycoproteins.  
Classification of Viruses  
Morphology: Viruses are grouped on the basis of size and shape, chemical composition and structure of the genome, 
and mode of replication. Helical morphology is seen in nucleocapsids of many filamentous and pleomorphic viruses. 
Helical nucleocapsids consist of a helical array of capsid proteins (protomers) wrapped around a helical filament of 
nucleic acid. Icosahedral morphology is characteristic of the nucleocapsids of many "spherical" viruses. The number 
and arrangement of the capsomeres (morphologic subunits of the icosahedron) are useful in identification and 
classification. Many viruses also have an outer envelope.  
Chemical Composition and Mode of Replication: The genome of a virus may consist of DNA or RNA, which may be 
single stranded (ss) or double stranded (ds), linear or circular. The entire genome may occupy either one nucleic acid 
molecule (monopartite genome) or several nucleic acid segments (multipartite genome). The different types of genome 
necessitate different replication strategies.  
Nomenclature  
Aside from physical data, genome structure and mode of replication are criteria applied in the classification and 
nomenclature of viruses, including the chemical composition and configuration of the nucleic acid, whether the genome 
is monopartite or multipartite. The genomic RNA strand of single-stranded RNA viruses is called sense (positive sense, 
plus sense) in orientation if it can serve as mRNA, and antisense (negative sense, minus sense) if a complementary 
strand synthesized by a viral RNA transcriptase serves as mRNA. Also considered in viral classification is the site of 
capsid assembly and, in enveloped viruses, the site of envelopment.  
9/8/2008
http://gsbs.utmb.edu/microbook/ch041.htm

Page 2 of 14
Medmicro Chapter 41
STRUCTURE AND FUNCTION  
Viruses are inert outside the host cell. Small viruses, e.g., polio and tobacco mosaic virus, can even be crystallized. 
Viruses are unable to generate energy. As obligate intracellular parasites, during replication, they fully depend on the 
complicated biochemical machinery of eukaryotic or prokaryotic cells. The main purpose of a virus is to deliver its 
genome into the host cell to allow its expression (transcription and translation) by the host cell.  
A fully assembled infectious virus is called a virion. The simplest virions consist of two basic components: nucleic acid 
(single- or double-stranded RNA or DNA) and a protein coat, the capsid, which functions as a shell to protect the viral 
genome from nucleases and which during infection attaches the virion to specific receptors exposed on the prospective 
host cell. Capsid proteins are coded for by the virus genome. Because of its limited size (Table 41-1) the genome codes 
for only a few structural proteins (besides non-structural regulatory proteins involved in virus replication). Capsids are 
formed as single or double protein shells and consist of only one or a few structural protein species. Therefore, multiple 
protein copies must self assemble to form the continuous three-dimensional capsid structure. Self assembly of virus 
capsids follows two basic patterns: helical symmetry, in which the protein subunits and the nucleic acid are arranged in 
a helix, and icosahedral symmetry, in which the protein subunits assemble into a symmetric shell that covers the nucleic 
acid-containing core.  
9/8/2008
http://gsbs.utmb.edu/microbook/ch041.htm

Page 3 of 14
Medmicro Chapter 41
 
Some virus families have an additional covering, called the envelope, which is usually derived in part from modified 
host cell membranes. Viral envelopes consist of a lipid bilayer that closely surrounds a shell of virus-encoded 
membrane-associated proteins. The exterior of the bilayer is studded with virus-coded, glycosylated (trans-) membrane 
proteins. Therefore, enveloped viruses often exhibit a fringe of glycoprotein spikes or knobs, also called peplomers. In 
viruses that acquire their envelope by budding through the plasma or another intracellular cell membrane, the lipid 
composition of the viral envelope closely reflects that of the particular host membrane. The outer capsid and the 
envelope proteins of viruses are glycosylated and important in determining the host range and antigenic composition of 
the virion. In addition to virus-specified envelope proteins, budding viruses carry also certain host cell proteins as 
integral constituents of the viral envelope. Virus envelopes can be considered an additional protective coat. Larger 
viruses often have a complex architecture consisting of both helical and isometric symmetries confined to different 
structural components. Small viruses, e.g., hepatitis B virus or the members of the picornavirus or parvovirus family, are
orders of magnitude more resistant than are the larger complex viruses, e.g. members of the herpes or retrovirus 
families.  
Classification of Viruses  
Viruses are classified on the basis of morphology, chemical composition, and mode of replication. The viruses that 
infect humans are currently grouped into 21 families, reflecting only a small part of the spectrum of the multitude of 
different viruses whose host ranges extend from vertebrates to protozoa and from plants and fungi to bacteria.  
Morphology  
Helical Symmetry  
In the replication of viruses with helical symmetry, identical protein subunits (protomers) self-assemble into a helical 
9/8/2008
http://gsbs.utmb.edu/microbook/ch041.htm

Page 4 of 14
Medmicro Chapter 41
array surrounding the nucleic acid, which follows a similar spiral path. Such nucleocapsids form rigid, highly elongated 
rods or flexible filaments; in either case, details of the capsid structure are often discernible by electron microscopy. In 
addition to classification as flexible or rigid and as naked or enveloped, helical nucleocapsids are characterized by 
length, width, pitch of the helix, and number of protomers per helical turn. The most extensively studied helical virus is 
tobacco mosaic virus (Fig. 41-1). Many important structural features of this plant virus have been detected by x-ray 
diffraction studies. Figure 41-2 shows Sendai virus, an enveloped virus with helical nucleocapsid symmetry, a member 
of the paramyxovirus family (see Ch. 30).  
 
FIGURE 41-1 The helical structure of the rigid tobacco mosaic virus rod. About 5 percent of the length of the 
virion is depicted. Individual 17,400-Da protein subunits (protomers) assemble in a helix with an axial repeat of 6.9 nm 
(49 subunits per three turns). Each turn contains a nonintegral number of subunits (16-1/3), producing a pitch of 2.3 nm. 
The RNA (2x1O6 Da) is sandwiched internally between adjacent turns of capsid protein, forming a RNA helix of the 
same pitch, 8 nm in diameter, that extends the length of virus, with three nucleotide bases in contact with each subunit. 
Some 2,130 protomers per virion cover and protect the RNA. The complete virus is 300 nm long and 18 nm in diameter 
with a hollow cylindrical core 4 nm in diameter. (From Mattern CFT: Symmetry in virus architecture. In Nayak DP 
(ed): Molecular Biology of Animal Viruses. Marcel Dekker, New York, 1977, as modified from Caspar DLD: Adv 
Protein Chem, 18:37,1963, with permission.)  
9/8/2008
http://gsbs.utmb.edu/microbook/ch041.htm

Page 5 of 14
Medmicro Chapter 41
 
FIGURE 41-2 Fragments of flexible helical nucleocapsids (NC) of Sendai virus, a paramyxovirus, are seen either 
within the protective envelope (E) or free, after rupture of the envelope. The intact nucleocapsid is about 1,000 nm 
long and 17 nm in diameter; its pitch (helical period) is about 5 nm. (x200,000) (courtesy of A. Kalica, National 
Institutes of Health.)  
Icosahedral Symmetry  
An icosahedron is a polyhedron having 20 equilateral triangular faces and 12 vertices (Fig. 41-3). Lines through 
opposite vertices define axes of fivefold rotational symmetry: all structural features of the polyhedron repeat five times 
within each 360° of rotation about any of the fivefold axes. Lines through the centers of opposite triangular faces form 
axes of threefold rotational symmetry; twofold rotational symmetry axes are formed by lines through midpoints of 
opposite edges. An icosaheron (polyhedral or spherical) with fivefold, threefold, and twofold axes of rotational 
symmetry (Fig. 41-3) is defined as having 532 symmetry (read as 5,3,2). 
9/8/2008
http://gsbs.utmb.edu/microbook/ch041.htm

Page 6 of 14
Medmicro Chapter 41
 
FIGURE 41-3 Icosahedral models seen, left to right, on fivefold, threefold, and twofold axes of rotational 
symmetry. These axes are perpendicular to the plane of the page and pass through the centers of each figure. Both 
polyhedral (upper) and spherical (lower) forms are represented by different virus families.  
Viruses were first found to have 532 symmetry by x-ray diffraction studies and subsequently by electron microscopy 
with negative-staining techniques. In most icosahedral viruses, the protomers, i.e. the structural polypeptide chains, are 
arranged in oligomeric clusters called capsomeres, which are readily delineated by negative staining electron 
microscopy and form the closed capsid shell (Fig. 41-4 a/b). The arrangement of capsomeres into an icosahedral shell 
(compare Fig. 41-4 with the upper right model in Fig. 41-3) permits the classification of such viruses by capsomere 
number and pattern. This requires the identification of the nearest pair of vertex capsomeres (called penton: those 
through which the fivefold symmetry axes pass) and the distribution of capsomeres between them. 
9/8/2008
http://gsbs.utmb.edu/microbook/ch041.htm

Page 7 of 14
Medmicro Chapter 41
 
FIGURE 41-4a Adenovirus after negative stain electron microscopy. The capsid reveals the typical isometric shell 
made up from 20 equilateral triangular faces. The 252 capsomeres, 12 pentons and the 240 hollow hexon capsomeres 
are arranged in a T = 25 symmetry pattern vetite (x 400,000).  
9/8/2008
http://gsbs.utmb.edu/microbook/ch041.htm

Page 8 of 14
Medmicro Chapter 41
FIGURE 41-4b Adenovirus model. Capsomeres are depicted as circles surrounded by an electron dense stain. The 
inclined axes, h and k, are indicated. The second vertex has indices h = 5, k = 0. The total number of capsomeres C = 10
(h2 + hk + k2) + 2 = 252. Capsomere organization is also expressed by the triangulation number, T, the number of unit 
triangles on each of the 20 faces of the icosahedron. A unit triangle is formed by lines joining the centers of three 
adjacent capsomeres. T = (h2 + hk + k2) = 25 for adenoviruses, and C = 1OT + 2. The 12 vertex capsomeres are 
surrounded by 5 other capsomeres each, therefore called penton and show 5-fold rotational symmetry. The penton base 
consists of 5 identical 85 kD polypeptide chains and extrudes a long antenna-like fiber protein. The 240 hexon 
capsomeres are trimers of the 120 kD hexon protomere polypeptide (for details see Ch. 67).  
In the adenovirus model in Figure 41-4, one of the penton capsomeres is arbitrarily assigned the indices h = 0, k = 0 
(origin), where h and k are the indicated axes of the inclined (60°) net of capsomeres. The net axes are formed by lines 
of the closest-packed neighboring capsomeres. In adenoviruses, the h and k axes also coincide with the edges of the 
triangular faces. Any second neighboring vertex capsomere has indices h = 5, k = 0 (or h = 0, k = 5). The capsomere 
number (C) can be determined to be 252 from the h and k indices and the equation: C = 10(h2 +hk + k2) + 2. This 
symmetry and number of capsomeres is typical of all members of the adenovirus family.  
Virus Core Structure  
Except in helical nucleocapsids, little is known about the packaging or organization of the viral genome within the core. 
Small virions are simple nucleocapsids containing 1 to 2 protein species. The larger viruses contain in a core the nucleic 
acid genome complexed with basic protein(s) and protected by a single- or double layered capsid (consisting of more 
than one species of protein) or by an envelope (Fig. 41-5).  
 
FIGURE 41-5 Two-dimensional diagram of HIV-1 correlating (immuno-) electron microscopic findings with the 
recent nomenclature for the structural components in a 2-letter code and with the molecular weights of the virus 
structural (glyco-) proteins. SU stands for outer surface glycoprotein, TM for transmembrane gp, MA for membrane 
associated or matrix protein, LI for core-envelope-link, CA for major capsid, NC for nucleocapsid protein, respectively. 
PR, RT and IN represent the virus-coded enzymes protease, reverse transcriptase and integrase that are functional 
during the life cycle of a retrovirus (from Gelderblom, HR, AIDS 5, 1991).  
Chemical Composition and Mode of Replication  
RNA Virus Genomes  
RNA viruses, comprising 70% of all viruses, vary remarkably in genome structure (Fig. 41-6). Because of the error rate 
9/8/2008
http://gsbs.utmb.edu/microbook/ch041.htm

Page 9 of 14
Medmicro Chapter 41
of the enzymes involved in RNA replication, these viruses usually show much higher mutation rates than do the DNA 
viruses. Mutation rates of 10-4 lead to the continuous generation of virus variants which show great adaptability to new 
hosts. The viral RNA may be single-stranded (ss) or double-stranded (ds), and the genome may occupy a single RNA 
segment or be distributed on two or more separate segments (segmented genomes). In addition, the RNA strand of a 
single-stranded genome may be either a sense strand (plus strand), which can function as messenger RNA (mRNA), or 
an antisense strand (minus strand), which is complementary to the sense strand and cannot function as mRNA protein 
translation (see Ch. 42). Sense viral RNA alone can replicate if injected into cells, since it can function as mRNA and 
initiate translation of virus-encoded proteins. Antisense RNA, on the other hand, has no translational function and 
cannot per se produce viral components.  
DsRNA viruses, e.g., members of the reovirus family, contain 10, 11 or 12 separate genome segments coding for 3 
enzymes involved in RNA replication, 3 major capsid proteins and a number of smaller structural proteins. Each 
segment consists of a complementary sense and antisense strand that is hydrogen bonded into a linear ds molecule. The 
replication of these viruses is complex; only the sense RNA strands are released from the infecting virion to initiate 
replication.  
The retrovirus genome comprises two identical, plus-sense ssRNA molecules, each monomer 7-11 kb in size, that are 
noncovalently linked over a short terminal region. Retroviruses contain 2 envelope proteins encoded by the env-gene, 4-
6 nonglycosylated core proteins and 3 non-structural functional proteins (reverse transcriptase, integrase, protease: RT, 
IN, PR) specified by the gag-gene (Fig. 41-5). The RT transcribes the viral ssRNA into double-stranded, circular 
proviral DNA. This DNA, mediated by the viral integrase, becomes covalently bonded into the DNA of the host cell to 
make possible the subsequent transcription of the sense strands that eventually give rise to retrovirus progeny. After 
assembly and budding, retroviruses show structural and functional maturation. In immature virions the structural 
proteins of the core are present as a large precursor protein shell. After proteolytic processing by the viral protease the 
proteins of the mature virion are rearranged and form the dense isometric or cone-shaped core typical of the mature 
virion, and the particle becomes infectious.  
DNA Virus Genomes  
Most DNA viruses (Fig. 41-6) contain a single genome of linear dsDNA. The papovaviruses, comprising the polyoma- 
and papillomaviruses, however, have circular DNA genomes, about 5.1 and 7.8 kb pairs in size. DsDNA serves as a 
template both for mRNA and for self-transcription. Three or 2 structural proteins make up the papovavirus capsid: in 
addition, 5-6 nonstructural proteins are encoded that are functional in virus transcription, DNA replication and cell 
transformation.  
9/8/2008
http://gsbs.utmb.edu/microbook/ch041.htm

Page 10 of 14
Medmicro Chapter 41
 
FIGURE 41-6 Schemes of 21 virus families infecting humans showing a number of distinctive criteria: presence 
of an envelope or (double-) capsid and internal nucleic acid genome. +, Sense strand; , antisense strand; ±, dsRNA 
or DNA; 0, circular DNA; C, number of capsomeres or holes, where known; nm, dimensions of capsid, or envelope 
when present; the hexagon designates the presence of an isometric or icosahedral outline.  
Single-stranded linear DNA, 4-6 kb in size, is found with the members of the Parvovirus family that comprises the 
parvo-, the erythro- and the dependoviruses. The virion contains 2-4 structural protein species which are differently 
derived from the same gene product (see Ch. 64). The adeno-associated virus (AAV, a dependovirus) is incapable of 
producing progeny virions except in the presence of helper viruses (adenovirus or herpesvirus). It is therefore said to be 
replication defective.  
Circular single-stranded DNA of only 1.7 to 2.3 kb is found in members of the Circovirus family which comprise the 
smallest autonomously propagated viruses. The isometric capsid measures 17 nm and is composed of 2 protein species 
only.  
Virus Classification  
On the basis of shared properties viruses are grouped at different hierarchical levels of order, family, subfamily, genus 
and species. More than 30,000 different virus isolates are known today and grouped in more than 3,600 species, in 164 
9/8/2008
http://gsbs.utmb.edu/microbook/ch041.htm

Page 11 of 14
Medmicro Chapter 41
genera and 71 families. Viral morphology provides the basis for grouping viruses into families. A virus family may 
consist of members that replicate only in vertebrates, only in invertebrates, only in plants, or only in bacteria. Certain 
families contain viruses that replicate in more than one of these hosts. This section concerns only the 21 families and 
genera of medical importance.  
Besides physical properties, several factors pertaining to the mode of replication play a role in classification: the 
configuration of the nucleic acid (ss or ds, linear or circular), whether the genome consists of one molecule of nucleic 
acid or is segmented, and whether the strand of ss RNA is sense or antisense. Also considered in classification is the site 
of viral capsid assembly and, in enveloped viruses, the site of nucleocapsid envelopment. Table 41-1 lists the major 
chemical and morphologic properties of the families of viruses that cause disease in humans.  
The use of Latinized names ending in -viridae for virus families and ending in -virus for viral genera has gained wide 
acceptance. The names of subfamilies end in -virinae. Vernacular names continue to be used to describe the viruses 
within a genus. In this text, Latinized endings for families and subfamilies usually are not used. Table 41-2 shows the 
current classification of medically significant viruses.  
9/8/2008
http://gsbs.utmb.edu/microbook/ch041.htm

Page 12 of 14
Medmicro Chapter 41
9/8/2008
http://gsbs.utmb.edu/microbook/ch041.htm

Page 13 of 14
Medmicro Chapter 41
 
In the early days of virology, viruses were named according to common pathogenic properties, e.g. organ tropism and/or 
modes of transmission, and often also after their discoverers. From the early 1950s until the mid-1960s, when many new 
viruses were being discovered, it was popular to compose virus names by using sigla (abbreviations derived from a few 
or initial letters). Thus the name Picornaviridae is derived from pico (small) and RNA; the name Reoviridae is derived 
from respiratory, enteric, and orphan viruses because the agents were found in both respiratory and enteric specimens 
and were not related to other classified viruses; Papovaviridae is from papilloma, polyoma, and vacuolating agent 
(simian virus 40 [SV40]); retrovirus is from reverse transcriptase; Hepadnaviridae is from the replication of the virus in 
hepatocytes and their DNA genomes, as seen in hepatitis B virus. Hepatitis A virus is classified now in the family 
Picornaviridae, genus Hepatovirus. Although the current rules for nomenclature do not prohibit the introduction of new 
sigla, they require that the siglum be meaningful to workers in the field and be recognized by international study groups. 
The names of the other families that contain viruses pathogenic for humans are derived as follows: Adenoviridae 
(adeno, "gland"; refers to the adenoid tissue from which the viruses were first isolated); Astroviridae (astron means 
star); Arenaviridae (arena "sand") describes the sandy appearance of the virion. Bunyaviridae (from Bunyamwera, the 
place in Africa where the type strain was isolated); Calicivirus (calix, "cup" or "goblet" from the cup-shaped 
depressions on the viral surfaces); Coronaviridae (corona, "crown") describes the appearance of the peplomers 
protruding from the viral surface; Filoviridae (from the Latin filum, "thread" or "filament") describes the morphology of 
these viruses. Herpesviridae (herpes, "creeping") describes the nature of the lesions; Orthomyxoviridae (ortho, "true," 
plus myxo "mucus," a substance for which the viruses have an affinity; Paramyxoviridae derived from para, "closely 
resembling" and myxo; Parvoviridae (parvus means, "small"); Poxviridae (pock means, "pustule"); Rhabdoviridae 
(rhabdo, "rod" describes the shape of the viruses and Togaviridae (toga, "cloak") refers to the tight viral envelope. 
9/8/2008
http://gsbs.utmb.edu/microbook/ch041.htm

Page 14 of 14
Medmicro Chapter 41
Several viruses of medical importance still remain unclassified. Some are difficult or impossible to propagate in 
standard laboratory host systems and thus cannot be obtained in sufficient quantity to permit more precise 
characterization. Hepatitis E virus, the Norwalk virus and similar agents (see Ch. 65) that cause nonbacterial 
gastroenteritis in humans are now assigned to the calicivirus family.  
The fatal transmissible dementias in humans and other animals (scrapie in sheep and goat; bovine spongiform 
encephalopathy in cattle, transmissible mink encephalopathy; Kuru, Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, and Gerstmann-
Straussler-Scheinker syndrome in humans) (see Ch. 71 ) are caused by the accumulation of non-soluble amyloid fibrils 
in the central nervous systems. The agents causing transmissible subacute spongiform encephalopathies have been 
linked to viroids or virinos (i.e. plant pathogens consisting of naked, but very stable circular RNA molecules of about 3-
400 bases in size, or infectious genomes enwrapped into a host cell coat) because of their resistance to chemical and 
physical agents. According to an alternative theory, the term "prion" has been coined to point to an essential nonviral 
infectious cause for these fatal encephalopathiesprion standing for self-replicating proteinaceous agent devoid of 
demonstrable nucleic acid. Some of the transmissible amyloidoses show a familial pattern and can be explained by 
defined mutations which render a primary soluble glycoprotein insoluble, which in turn leads to the pathognomonic 
accumulation of amyloid fibers and plaques. The pathogenesis of the sporadic amyloidoses, however, is still a matter of 
highly ambitious research.  
REFERENCES  
Caspar DLD: Design principles in virus particle construction. In Horsfall FL, Tamm I (eds): Viral and Rickettsial 
Infections in Man. 4th Ed. JB Lippincott, Philadelphia, 1975  
Fields BN (ed): Virology. 3rd Ed. Lippincott-Raven Press, 1995  
Gajdusek DC: Unconventional viruses and the origin and disappearance of kuru. Science 197:943, 1977  
Gelderblom HR: Assembly and morphology of HIV: potential effect of structure on viral function. AIDS 5, 617-
637,1991  
Mattern CFT: Symmetry in virus architecture. In Nayak DP (ed): Molecular Biology of Animal Viruses. Marcel 
Dekker, New York, 1977  
Morse SS (ed): The Evolutionary Biology of Viruses. Raven Press, New York, 1994  
Murphy FA, Fauquet CM, Bishop DHL, et al. (eds): Virus Taxonomy: Sixth Report of the International Committee on 
Taxonomy of Viruses. Springer-Verlag, New York, 1995  
Palmer EL, Martin ML: An Atlas of Mammalian Viruses. CRC Press, Boca Raton, 1988  
Nermut MV, Stevens AC (eds): Animal Virus Structure. Elsevier, Amsterdam, 1989
9/8/2008
http://gsbs.utmb.edu/microbook/ch041.htm
View publication stats

