MI67CH25-Turner
ARI
19 June 2013
8:14
I
V
E
E
W
R
S
E
Review in Advance first posted online
on June 28, 2013. (Changes may
still occur before final publication  
online and in print.)
I
C
N
N
A
A
V
D
On the Biological Success
of Viruses
Brian R. Wasik and Paul E. Turner
Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, Yale University, New Haven,
Connecticut 06520-8106; email: brian.wasik@yale.edu, paul.turner@yale.edu
Annu. Rev. Microbiol. 2013. 67:519–41
Keywords
The Annual Review of Microbiology is online at
micro.annualreviews.org
adaptation, biodiversity, environmental change, evolvability, extinction,
robustness
This article’s doi:
10.1146/annurev-micro-090110-102833
Abstract
Copyright c⃝ 2013 by Annual Reviews.
All rights reserved
Are viruses more biologically successful than cellular life? Here we exam-
ine many ways of gauging biological success, including numerical abun-
dance, environmental tolerance, type biodiversity, reproductive potential,
and widespread impact on other organisms. We especially focus on suc-
cessful ability to evolutionarily adapt in the face of environmental change.
Viruses are often challenged by dynamic environments, such as host immune
function and evolved resistance as well as abiotic fluctuations in temperature,
moisture, and other stressors that reduce virion stability. Despite these chal-
lenges, our experimental evolution studies show that viruses can often readily
adapt, and novel virus emergence in humans and other hosts is increasingly
problematic. We additionally consider whether viruses are advantaged in
evolvability—the capacity to evolve—and in avoidance of extinction. On the
basis of these different ways of gauging biological success, we conclude that
viruses are the most successful inhabitants of the biosphere.
519
Changes may still occur before final publication online and in print

MI67CH25-Turner
ARI
19 June 2013
8:14
Contents
INTRODUCTION. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 520
PART I: WHAT CONSTITUTES BIOLOGICAL SUCCESS? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 520
Viral Abundance. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 521
Viral Biodiversity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 522
PART II: WHY ARE VIRUSES SO SUCCESSFUL? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 524
PART III: ADAPTATION AND EVOLVABILITY. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 526
Biotic and Abiotic Challenges Faced by Viruses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 528
Can Viruses Adapt to Cope with Environmental Change? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 529
Are Viruses More Evolvable than Cellular Life? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 532
Can Viruses Better Avoid Extinction?. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 535
CONCLUSION . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 536
INTRODUCTION
Ain’t you hungry for success, success, success, success? Does it matter?
—The Rolling Stones, Shattered (1978)
Are viruses the most successful inhabitants of the biosphere? Our contention is the affirmative,
and the goal of this article is to similarly convince the reader. The evidence we present is manifold.
Viruses are ubiquitous, outnumbering cellular organisms and seemingly occupying every possible
environmental niche that can support life. Although primarily submicroscopic, this viral multitude
presents extreme biodiversity, with differing morphologies, varying strategies of host infection,
and all known types of nucleic acids for genetic inheritance across generations. Perhaps most
impressively, viruses appear very capable of adapting in the face of environmental changes; they can
often evolve to overcome host resistance and immunity and may also prevail despite environmental
perturbations experienced outside of their hosts. The repercussions of this adaptability extend
beyond the viral world. Owing to the prevalence of virus-host interactions, viruses can strongly
impact which host types dominate populations and communities, in turn affecting all levels of
biological organization, from host-genome composition to ecosystem function. On the basis of
many different ways of gauging biological success, we provide overwhelming evidence that viruses
are extremely successful at what they do: continually evolving in order to harness cellular life to
replicate and produce more viruses.
PART I: WHAT CONSTITUTES BIOLOGICAL SUCCESS?
Biodiversity:
the estimated variety
of species or genetic
types of organisms
Can it be argued, however, that viruses are the most successful inhabitants of our planet? Biolog-
ical success is an old concept, predating the discovery of viruses around the turn of the twentieth
century. In the mid-1800s and before, Charles Darwin (20) and earlier evolution thinkers tried to
make sense of how and why some biological types persisted in nature, whereas others did not. What
constitutes biological success? Most broadly, biological success has been discussed historically in
terms of comparisons between groups of organisms, at taxonomic or nontaxonomic levels above
that of species. For example, flowering plants—the angiosperms—are often touted as more suc-
cessful than their nonflowering counterparts—the gymnosperms—because flowering plants show
greater species diversity. But relative biodiversity is merely one metric for gauging the biological
520
Wasik· Turner
Changes may still occur before final publication online and in print

MI67CH25-Turner
ARI
19 June 2013
8:14
Evolvability: the
capacity of a
population to evolve
via natural selection
Extinction: the
disappearance of a
population or species,
causing reduced
biodiversity
Natural selection:
the process of genetic
change in a
population, whereby
variants advantaged in
survival and/or
reproduction increase
in frequency
success of groups, and other bases for comparison exist; if ability to thrive in cold temperatures and
nutrient-poor soils are the measures, gymnosperms instead are the more impressive land plants.
Thus, in examining whether viruses are more biologically successful than Earth’s other inhabitants,
we take care to consider many different means for comparison, rather than a single one.
Here we examine the biological success of viruses, using metrics that include numerical abun-
dance, environmental tolerance, biodiversity, reproductive potential and efficiency, and modes
of genetic inheritance. However, our greatest focus is on viral adaptability in the face of various
biotic and abiotic environmental changes; we draw heavily from our own empirical studies with
RNA viruses. In addition, we consider metrics that are admittedly very difficult to assess, such
as relative evolvability and persistence in the face of extinction. Judging by the evidence amassed
from these different means for comparison, our contention is that on average viruses are indeed
the most successful group of biological entities on the planet.
What is the utility of determining whether viruses are more successful than other organismal
groups, which essentially means all of cellular life? If biological success is an ill-defined term, for
which no consensus exists for making comparisons, is it even useful to spend time and energy
examining this idea? Viruses are not composed of cells and therefore are not typically consid-
ered alongside other biological entities, for example, when building the universal tree of life
(18). This omission is due to a dichotomy between fundamental body plans; a virus is generally
composed of nucleic acid surrounded by a protein shell (capsid), whereas cellular life consists of
ribosome-encoding organisms (64). However, viruses and cellular organisms both play by the same
evolutionary rules: the processes of spontaneous mutation, natural selection, genetic drift, etc.,
that underlie the evolutionary patterns described by phylogenetic inference. This commonality
indicates that a straight-up comparison is legitimate and potentially highly useful. The relative
simplicity of viral genomes and life cycles provides tractable opportunities to understand how
evolution proceeds in response to selective challenges. Therefore, by understanding how viruses
achieve biological success—especially through adaptive evolution—we can infer by extension what
promotes versus limits biological success in all evolving systems.
Viral Abundance
If sheer abundance were the only criterion for defining biological success, the argument would be
over; viruses are estimated to easily outnumber all forms of cellular life combined. This comparison
begins by considering the eubacteria, which are extremely ancient, having appeared roughly 3 to
4 billion years ago. Bacteria are not only ancient but also highly numerous, often achieving large
population sizes in the wide variety of niches than can support metabolizing organisms; overall,
bacteria number perhaps 1030 individuals at any one time across the planet (91). However, the
vast majority of studies that relate bacterial numbers to those of bacteria-specific viruses (the
bacteriophages) show that phages are numerically superior (7). In particular, surveys from aquatic
environments (especially the oceans) demonstrate that viruses tend to exceed their unicellular hosts
by at least an order of magnitude (6, 39, 74). Thus, just counting the phages in the virosphere,
perhaps 1031–1032 individual viral particles exist on the planet at any one moment (39).
We are unaware of any similar attempts to compare viral numbers with those of their archaeal
and eukaryotic hosts. However, one recent study employed pyrosequencing and bioinformatics
methods to examine the DNA of viruses found in raw-sewage samples from around the world
(14). Although this approach did not allow for numerical estimates of viral types, the study clearly
showed that phages are more abundant than viruses of eukaryotes. The study also found that a huge
variety of viruses remain unclassified, with no genetic match to characterized viruses described
in genetic databases. These results exemplify the fact that the vast majority of viruses remain to
www.annualreviews.org • On the Biological Success of Viruses
521
Changes may still occur before final publication online and in print

MI67CH25-Turner
ARI
19 June 2013
8:14
be discovered, and they reinforce the notion that our understanding of the virosphere is woefully
incomplete. Only greater sampling and surveillance of natural ecosystems can ultimately remedy
this shortcoming. Nevertheless, these studies indicate the awesome numerical abundance of viruses
on Earth and support the conclusion that they are numerically dominant in the biosphere.
Viral Biodiversity
One alternative means to gauge the biological success of viruses is to consider their known biodi-
versity. Earth contains a wide variety of potential habitats (available niches) that life can occupy.
On the one hand, evolution of phenotypic plasticity can allow a single species to inhabit multiple
varied niches. On the other hand, organisms can evolve to be highly niche specific, as shown by the
process of adaptive radiation, in which a group of related species has evolved to occupy different
niches. Viruses lean more toward the latter example. As a group, viruses appear to be composed of
myriad species that occupy different ecological niche spaces, largely defined by the specific host(s)
that provides a suitable environment for viral replication.
Viruses infect host species throughout all major branches of the cellular tree of life
(61) (Figure 1). This means viruses share those terrestrial and aquatic environmental niches
that support cellular life around the globe. This biological success extends to virus-host interac-
tions in environments with extreme temperature and pH and with low oxygen and available light.
Because so much of viral diversity remains unknown, the fundamental natural history of viruses is
a very active area within virology. A prime example is the discovery and description of viruses that
specifically infect archaeal hosts (archaeal phage); the often unique morphologies of these viruses
have warranted naming of new viral families (Figure 1), which may constitute fertile territory for
taxonomic discovery in viruses in the foreseeable future (60). These recent archaeal phage discov-
eries include the first described RNA viruses of archaea and a virus that intriguingly contains a
“hybrid” genome of both RNA and DNA viral origins, not observed in any other virus to date (10,
27). Furthermore, the recent discovery of large viruses has overturned the old assumption that all
viruses are submicroscopic. Rather, mimiviruses rival in size the smallest known cellular life, such
as Mycoplasma bacteria (63). Undoubtedly, future discoveries will continue to identify novel viral
families, greatly expanding their already impressive biodiversity.
Across known viral families, viruses present exceedingly diverse morphologies, ranging from
icosahedrons, to rod-like filamentous particles, to sack-like structures (61) (Figure 1). Aside from
this structural diversity, viruses feature a diversity of genetic options for inheritance across gen-
erations that is simply not present in cellular life. All cellular organisms rely foremost on double-
stranded DNA as the nucleic acid that dictates phenotypic traits and cross-generational inheri-
tance. In contrast, viruses show all possible genetic options, with genetic inheritance determined
by double- and single-stranded DNA and RNA, depending on the viral family. These different
inheritance strategies are used to define viruses under the Baltimore classification system, which
distinguishes viruses by the replicative strategy that ultimately creates the viral mRNA translated
by the host cell (4). Interestingly, these genetic options generally align with the morphological
−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−→
Figure 1
The families of double-stranded DNA viruses associated with the three domains of life. The viral families
listed are approved by the International Committee on Taxonomy of Viruses, and the schematic
representations of virions (not drawn to scale) are presented as in Reference 33. Proposed families are shown
in quotation marks. Abbreviations: SH1, Haloarcula hispanica virus 1; STIV, Sulfolobus turreted icosahedral
virus. Modified with permission from Reference 61.
522
Wasik· Turner
Changes may still occur before final publication online and in print

MI67CH25-Turner
ARI
19 June 2013
8:14
Corticoviridae
Tectiviridae
Plasmaviridae
Bacteria
Podoviridae
Siphoviridae
Myoviridae
?
Siphoviridae
Euryarchaea
Myoviridae
Salterprovirus
Unclassified (Fuselloviridae?)
SH1
Rudiviridae
Lipothrixviridae
Archaea
Guttaviridae
“Globuloviridae”
“Ampullaviridae”
“Bicaudaviridae”
Fuselloviridae
Crenarchaea
STIV
Nimaviridae
Baculoviridae
Ascoviridae
Polydnaviridae
Herpesviridae
Adenoviridae
Eukarya
Polyomaviridae, Papillomaviridae
Poxviridae
Asfarviridae
Mimiviridae
Iridoviridae
Phycodnaviridae
www.annualreviews.org • On the Biological Success of Viruses
523
Changes may still occur before final publication online and in print

MI67CH25-Turner
ARI
19 June 2013
8:14
delimitation of viruses—the classic method used to name viral families, overseen by the Interna-
tional Committee on Virus Taxonomy. Clearly, viruses are more successful than cellular life when
it comes to evolved genetic options for cross-generational inheritance, and the morphological
diversity of viruses is vast despite their submicroscopic size.
PART II: WHY ARE VIRUSES SO SUCCESSFUL?
Adaptation: the
process by which a
population evolves via
natural selection to
gain new or modified
traits that improve
fitness
Viruses numerically dominate the biosphere, and even though the full extent of viral biodiversity
has yet to be discovered, it is clear that they are exceedingly biodiverse. If these are reasonable
metrics for gauging biological success, we can then ask: Why are viruses so successful? Compared
with other biological systems, viruses show an amazing capacity to produce large numbers of
progeny in a short period of time, a capacity that contributes to observations of their global
densities. This efficiency can be considered from a conservation of energy standpoint, because viral
reproduction exclusively utilizes the metabolic energy generated by cellular life. In addition, the
efficiency is appreciable from an economy of scale standpoint, because the genetic architectures
of viral genomes tend to be highly streamlined in terms of gene number, overlapping reading
frames, and modularity. Moreover, the biological success of viruses must relate to adaptation
via natural selection, as this proximately determines whether a population thrives in the event
of inevitable environmental change, and ultimately dictates extent of biodiversity. In this section
and the next, we consider the many mechanistic reasons why viruses are biologically successful,
particularly their ability to adapt in the face of environmental challenges.
Many cellular organisms can produce very large numbers of offspring in a single generation,
especially if their mode of reproduction is asexual. In viruses, reproduction is strictly asexual, yet
these microbes are arguably the reproductive champions among biological populations. A single
viral particle can infect a cell and harness the host’s metabolism to drive replication and create
hundreds or thousands of viral progeny in under an hour (3). In general, the mode of genome
replication inside the host cell facilitates these very large numbers. Often, viral replication cycles
occur via efficient genetic mechanisms, such as rolling circle replication and stamping machine
replication (one template virus used to replicate all progeny genomes in the cell), that can create
very large numbers of genomes off of a single template. From a population size standpoint, consider
the ability of HIV to achieve extremely high titers (viremia) in the blood of a newly infected human:
Roughly 5 × 103 infectious virions or 1 × 107 viral RNA units are present in every milliliter of
plasma during the acute phase of HIV infection (37) (Figure 2). The high viral loads experienced
by infected multicellular hosts are often central to the debilitating effects of viral disease. This can
occur either because the rampant viral reproduction directly destroys vital tissues and organs or,
in the case of HIV, because the high viral load destroys precious immune system cells, eventually
leaving the host vulnerable to opportunistic infection by other pathogens.
Allorganismsoccasionallyexperiencesomesortofresourcelimitation,whetherofaconsumable
resource or, for example, of space to grow or access to mates. Evolutionary biology concerns
competition between individuals for limiting resources, with the expectation that selection will
favor the variants that most efficiently use available resources. For this reason, selection should
tend to push organisms to harness the energy provided by others: Why waste your own energy on
reproduction if you can evolve a means to have some other organism provide that energy for you?
This constant challenge to obtain limited resources has been used to explain why parasitism
seems to be the dominant evolved lifestyle on our planet (62). Viruses represent the pinnacle of
selfish efficiency, because they are biological entities that dispense entirely with harnessing their
own resources to make energy for reproduction. Rather, they harness the metabolism of host
cells, diverting their hosts’ energy away from normal cellular functions and toward production of
524
Wasik· Turner
Changes may still occur before final publication online and in print

MI67CH25-Turner
ARI
19 June 2013
8:14
Phase:
Acute
Chronic
AIDS
1,000
106
800
105
600
104
400
103
200
CD4 T-cell count
(cells per cubic mm of blood)
Viral load
(HIV RNA copies per ml of plasma)
0
11
6
12
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9 10
102
Weeks
Years
Time since infection
Figure 2
The general pattern of progression in an untreated HIV infection. An untreated HIV infection typically has
three phases. During the acute phase, the viral load (red ) spikes and the host may show general symptoms of
a viral infection. During the largely asymptomatic chronic phase, the host mobilizes an immune response
that fails to halt viral replication. During the AIDS phase, the viral load climbs again as cells of the immune
system, especially CD4 T cells (blue), are destroyed. Modified with permission from Reference 37. Copyright
c⃝ 2004 Pearson Prentice Hall, Inc.
viral particles instead. Because viruses are much less complex than cellular life, this energy can
be efficiently used to make viral genomes and proteins, compared with the larger reserves needed
for cellular DNA replication, protein synthesis, lipid biosynthesis, energy (ATP) synthesis, etc.
Virusescanthusmechanisticallyoutcompeteahostcellforresourceswithinthecellitself.Although
the energy used to make viral progeny should be much less than that used to maintain cellular
homeostasis, viruses have evolved diverse mechanisms that promote their own replication and
protein synthesis while suppressing normal host function (89). These include cap-independent
mechanisms (e.g., IRES) as well as specific modulation/sequestration of host protein synthesis
cofactors (5). Although the thermodynamics of viral replication may give viruses a slight edge over
the house, selection is not above giving them the means to further rig the game in their favor.
The efficiency of viruses is also reflected by the structure of their genomes. Like most genetic
systems, viruses can experience recombination in which genes or cassettes of genes are swapped
between individuals. In addition, viruses seem capable of evolving highly mosaic genomes, in
which some portions of the genome derive from distantly related or completely unrelated viruses.
One example is the identical RNA polymerase shared by the families Cystoviridae (RNA phages)
and Reoviridae (viruses that infect eukaryotic hosts) (6). These observations show that viruses that
are selected under very different circumstances may sometimes recombine, and selection will then
presumably favor hybrid variants in which a large portion of the genome is summarily replaced. It
is unclear how often these events occur in nature, but they certainly blur the distinctions between
viruses and challenge our ability to accurately resolve deep nodes in viral phylogenetics. This
modularityof viral genomes creates thepossibility for efficient origin of new genome combinations,
and further work is needed to determine how much it may contribute to the generation of viral
biodiversity.
Viruses have evolved diverse solutions to maximizing efficiency in their genetic carrying capac-
ity. Whereas more complex cellular organisms have been afforded some relaxation in genome size,
viruses remain specifically constrained by selection to reduce nonessential genomic elements. The
result is a broad array of genomic architectures in the larger known virome. One example is the
www.annualreviews.org • On the Biological Success of Viruses
525
Changes may still occur before final publication online and in print

MI67CH25-Turner
ARI
19 June 2013
8:14
employment of overlapping reading frames (41). Increasing the carrying capacity of the genome
allows viruses to increase their success through an economy of size.
The efficiency of viruses is also reflected by the multifunctionality sometimes observed for
virally encoded proteins, particularly in the case of RNA viruses that are constrained in genome
size. A single viral gene product can encode proteins with a diverse set of functions during the
viral replication cycle. One example is the matrix protein of vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV), an
arthropod-borne virus (arbovirus) in the negative-strand RNA virus family Rhabdoviridae. The
VSV matrix protein functions both in structural organization and as a modulator of host macro-
molecular function (1, 8). In terms of efficient genomic architecture, many viruses encode their
gene products in single open reading frames, resulting in a large polyprotein that is posttranslation-
ally cleaved into specific subunits. In the Togaviridae, a family of positive-strand RNA arboviruses,
the nonstructural polyprotein is uniquely functional at different stages of cleavage (Figure 3). The
release of the polymerase subunit (nsP4) allows for complement-genome synthesis. However, fur-
ther processing of the polyprotein P123 into its respective subunits is necessary for complete
genome replication and subgenomic transcription (22, 46, 69, 76). Here, evolution has shaped the
genomic architecture and the temporality of gene product function to regulate the larger process
of viral gene expression. These various mechanisms hint at the many ways in which viruses have
successfully evolved to overcome the limitations of using a small genome to achieve myriad and
complex functions.
PART III: ADAPTATION AND EVOLVABILITY
Adaptation is the process by which a population is naturally selected to evolve new or modified
traits, which allow individuals in the population to better meet challenges posed by their current
environment. A different but related phenomenon is evolvability, which is the capacity to evolve
via natural selection; a population may be relatively advantaged over other populations in its ability
to adapt in the face of environmental change.
Both adaptation and evolvability are fundamentally important processes, because the vast ma-
jority of organisms seem to thrive in environments that are dynamic, rather than static, through
time. These fluctuating conditions make it likely that individuals will encounter some degree of
environmental change during their lifetimes and that most biological populations will be routinely
challenged to adapt. Many organisms are additionally challenged because they are incapable of
choosing the environment where they reside, causing them to experience different environments
across space. For example, microbes may be passively moved via air, water, etc., causing them to
frequently encounter environments where they may be poorly suited to survive and/or reproduce.
In general, organisms’ inability to distinguish suitable habitats from unsuitable ones (or their
susceptibility to passive movement between such environments) may cause them to enter an
ecological trap, defined as an environment that is poor in quality for survival/reproduction and that
prevents population sustainability (i.e., births that exceed deaths). The incapability of microbes
to distinguish good-quality habitats from ecological traps will contribute to local extinctions.
One example is that viruses must initiate infection by attaching to a cell surface receptor but
−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−→
Figure 3
Pleiotropic gene function at the level of polyprotein cleavage. A single viral gene product (P1234) encodes
three distinct RNA polymerases in alphavirus-infected cells. Proteolytic cleavage of the polyprotein
modulates the template specificity and function of the RNA-dependent RNA polymerase. Adapted from
Reference 73, with permission from the authors of Reference 36.
526
Wasik· Turner
Changes may still occur before final publication online and in print

MI67CH25-Turner
ARI
19 June 2013
8:14
Translation of
genome RNA
nsP2 proteinase cis-
cleavage at 3/4 site
P1234
P123 + nsP4
P1234
Negative-strand RNA synthesis
Positive-strand genome RNA
5' C
An 3'
Un 5'
C
5'
Negative-strand RNA
An 3'
Un 5'
nsP2 proteinase
cleavage of 1/2 bond
C
5'
An 3'
Negative-strand RNA
Un 5'
Synthesis of 49S
positive-strand RNA
nsP1 + p23 + nsP4
An 5'
C
5'
Positive-strand genome RNA
Un
Synthesis of
negative-strand RNA
Negative-strand RNA
5' C
An 3'
Un 5'
nsP2 proteinase
cleavage of 2/3 bond
5' C
An 3'
Un 5'
nsP1 + nsP2 +
nsP3 + nsP4
Synthesis of 26S positive-strand mRNA 
and 49S positive-strand RNA
but not negative-strand RNA
Un 5'
C
5'
+
Un 5'
C
5'
www.annualreviews.org • On the Biological Success of Viruses
527
Changes may still occur before final publication online and in print

MI67CH25-Turner
ARI
19 June 2013
8:14
are incapable of avoiding a poor host if it has the correct binding site. If the cell or tissue type
is nonsupportive (nonpermissive) for productive viral replication, the infection would ultimately
constitute a dead end for the virus. A viral population that contains a high frequency of individuals
that enter this ecological trap should be fated for extinction (25), in the absence of any genotypic
change, such as evolution of an altered attachment protein, that remedies the ecological-trap
problem.
The remainder of this article addresses the ability of viruses to adapt to overcome problems
such as ecological traps, as well as the question of whether some viruses may be considered more
evolvable relative to other viruses or to cellular life in general. However, before addressing these
topics, it is crucial to first consider whether viruses tend to exist in static versus dynamic environ-
ments across time and space, because adaptation is only necessary in the face of environmental
turnover. How often do viruses experience environmental change? When encountering new en-
vironments that limit their growth or survival, what options do viruses have to cope? Do these
options differ from those possessed by cellular organisms?
Biotic and Abiotic Challenges Faced by Viruses
We contend that viruses are equally or more likely than cellular organisms are to encounter
environmental change, regardless of the target host genotypes or species (83). This opinion is
based on the many types of environmental novelties that viruses are expected to encounter, across
all levels of biological organization considered.
At the base level of molecules, the most proximate challenge for a virus is to successfully initiate
cell attachment and entry. These early infection events are driven by functional viral molecules,
such as proteins that permit cell attachment and enzymes important for transition into the cell.
But the functional utility of these molecules may be partially or fully compromised depending on
changes in the host. For example, a coevolutionary arms race between viruses and their hosts will
exert selection for host modifications that prevent viral infection. Phages are incapable of infecting
host bacteria that have evolved resistance due to a variety of mechanisms, ranging from cell-surface
modifications that prevent binding/entry to postinfection barriers such as restriction enzymes and
CRISPRs that prevent intracellular viral replication (11). Similarly, the human adaptive immune
system creates changing environments for pathogens such as influenza A viruses, explaining why
evolutionarily successful flu virus lineages are those with altered antigenic (hemagglutinin protein)
sites that provide an advantage in the face of immune pressure (35).
Higher levels of biological organization can also present viruses with changing environmental
conditions. At the levels of cells and tissues, viruses of multicellular hosts may be challenged
by intrahost replication that involves cells of varying permissiveness. For example, infected cells
can release chemicals that signal neighboring cells to upregulate innate immune function, which
will compromise the subsequent replication and spread of viruses in host tissues. At the level of
host populations, viruses may encounter variability among hosts in their susceptibility to infection.
Such variability may result from differences among host genotypes or host physiologies, such as the
effects of host age on strength of innate immunity (45) and the effects of adaptive immune function.
These many challenges can adversely affect intrahost viral reproduction and compromise infectious
viral spread among individuals in the host population. At the level of ecological communities, some
viruses must undergo obligate or opportunistic replication in very different host species, as is the
case with arboviruses that thrive by reproducing in both arthropod vectors and vertebrate hosts.
Viruses passively encounter novel host species as they are moved through coarse-grained biotic
environments, and it is increasingly recognized that, compared with other types of pathogens, such
asbacteriaorprotozoa,virusesaremorepronetosuccessfullyemergeonnewhosts(16,75).Habitat
528
Wasik· Turner
Changes may still occur before final publication online and in print

MI67CH25-Turner
ARI
19 June 2013
8:14
fragmentation and other anthropogenic changes to the environment may increase the probability
that viruses encounter new host species, including humans, thus augmenting emergence risk
(54). These many examples of environmental change constitute only a subset of the myriad biotic
challenges viruses face across different levels of biological organization, with adverse consequences
for viral infection and epidemic spread.
Historically, the novel abiotic challenges viruses face have received less attention than the
aforementioned biotic challenges. Nevertheless, many types of abiotic perturbations can cause
viral mortality, i.e., the inability of a viral particle to successfully complete within-host replication
after experiencing an environmental challenge (56). A wide variety of environmental stressors
are known to somehow compromise a virus’s subsequent ability to productively infect a host;
examples include changes in ambient temperature, ionic strength (saltiness), UV radiation, acidity,
atmospheric pressure, and moisture (2, 49, 56, 58). Although capsids function to protect viral
nucleic acid from degradation by these and other environmental stressors, the protection is not
absolute, and some viruses may experience very short half-lives outside of the host under these
harsh conditions. Some viruses seem extremely tolerant of environmental exposure; for example,
some rotaviruses can remain stable on exposed surfaces for long periods, promoting successful
outbreaks in humans living in a closed habitat such as an ocean-bound cruise ship (32). However,
mechanisms to explain long versus short viral half-lives remain to be discovered. For example, it
is often unknown whether differences in viral mortality in the face of environmental change are
better explained by resistance to degradation of nucleic acid (23) or by resistance to destruction
of capsid proteins and viral enzymes used in cell entry (26).
Ecosystem-level changes have the potential to threaten the survival of all biological popu-
lations, but their possible impacts on the tiniest entities are seldom studied and remain poorly
understood. Threats of global warming, rising sea levels, and ocean acidification receive plenty of
attention from the popular press and are well known to the lay public. These radical widespread
changes would be experienced by viruses, just as they would by other biological populations.
However, only a few studies have examined the effects on viral mortality of abiotic challenges
associated with proposed ecosystem changes, such as increased acidity of marine water (48) or
stochastic temperature fluctuations predicted by some climate change models (2). More research
is needed to identify how the survival of viruses may be compromised under radical ecosystem
changes. Virus-induced mortality could regulate the size of a host population, as is proposed for
cyanophage regulation of cyanobacteria populations in the ocean; arguably, this regulation would
mean that the viruses indirectly dictate how much the bacteria contribute to global photosynthetic
productivity (74). Thus, if increased ocean acidification were more detrimental to cyanophages
than to their host cyanobacteria, this greater vulnerability could create a regulation imbalance
leading to altered mean photosynthetic productivity in the ecosystem. At the least, this scenario
could cause more-variable photosynthetic productivity, because blooms and crashes could occur
when cyanobacteria populations are released from cyanophage regulation. This idea is speculative,
but it is certainly worth researching whether ecosystem function can be upset by the effects of
widespread environmental change on the most microscopic of populations. Our main message
is that viruses are also vulnerable to adverse effects of ecosystem change, and the effects of such
change on virus-host ecological interactions constitute vital areas for future study.
Can Viruses Adapt to Cope with Environmental Change?
Apparently, the answer to this question is a resounding “yes,” at least for an environmental chal-
lenge of extreme importance in biomedicine, agriculture, and conservation biology. Of the afore-
mentioned biotic challenges faced by viruses, infection of new host genotypes or species has
www.annualreviews.org • On the Biological Success of Viruses
529
Changes may still occur before final publication online and in print

MI67CH25-Turner
ARI
19 June 2013
8:14
Sex: any genetic
exchange between
individuals that results
in new combinations
of alleles
Specialist: a variant
with a relatively
narrow niche, allowing
reproduction and/or
survival under few
ecological conditions
Generalist: a variant
with a relatively broad
niche, allowing
reproduction and/or
survival under many
ecological conditions
received the greatest attention, due to concerns over the effects of emerging viruses on human dis-
ease morbidity/mortality, on economic losses incurred in agricultural systems, and on continued
preservation of rare species threatened with extinction. Obviously, viruses must occasionally be
successful in coping with this type of environmental change; otherwise, emergence (especially of
viral pathogens that zoonotically transmit from wild and domesticated animals to humans) would
not be recognized as a widespread problem (42). However, it bears reminding that hosts such as
humans are exposed to a wide diversity of potential pathogens through the air we breathe, the food
and water we ingest, etc.; only a tiny subset of these viruses can climb the “pathogen pyramid”
(93) to become worrisome pathogens that successfully infect, transmit, and spread epidemically in
humans. A virus does not necessarily have to change genetically to emerge on a novel host; rather,
it may fortuitously infect a previously unencountered host (31, 85). Still, evidence suggests that
one or more point mutations are needed for a virus to overcome a new environmental challenge,
such as emergence on a new host or better survival in the face of an abiotic stressor. Therefore,
drawing heavily upon our own empirical observations in RNA viruses, we confine our discussion
below to examples in which viruses adapt via beneficial genetic modification, allowing them to
overcome biotic and abiotic challenges. In particular, we focus on the role of genetic variation
created through spontaneous mutation and sex (recombination/reassortment) in contributing to
RNA virus adaptation under environmental change. We use these examples to illustrate that vi-
ral adaptability is impressive but also to emphasize that adaptation to one set of conditions may
concomitantly affect viral performance under other circumstances (i.e., evolved trade-offs across
environments).
Spontaneous mutations are the primary currency for evolution by natural selection. These
mutations create genetic variability among individuals, which can lead to phenotypic differences
that dictate which individuals are selectively favored to dominate the population in its current
environment. From the perspective of inevitable environmental turnover, it is intriguing to study
whether the advantageous effects of beneficial mutations are confined to the environment where
they are positively selected or whether they are broadly beneficial across environments, includ-
ing those previously unencountered. These circumstantial effects relate to the broad ecological
concepts of environmental specialization versus generalization (47, 82). By definition, specialists
are capable of thriving under relatively confined ecological conditions (narrow niche), whereas
generalists can occupy a broader niche space.
We studied the specialized versus generalized role of mutations in host emergence using phage
ϕ6, an RNA virus that infects pseudomonads, especially certain pathovars (plant-pathogenic vari-
eties) of Pseudomonas syringae bacteria (31). Phage ϕ6 is usually grown on P. syringae pv. phaseolicola
in the laboratory, but point mutations in the P3 attachment protein determine whether the virus
can shift onto other species of host bacteria; the spectrum of mutations in P3 allowing such host
shifts contains at least 10 different nonsynonymous substitutions (31, 83). Interestingly, most of
these mutations allow host-niche expansion of the virus, through which it is capable of infecting
a novel host but maintains the ability to infect the original P. syringae pv. phaseolicola host (29,
31). This property allowed us to test whether or not these emergence mutations are on average
cost free. It is widely presumed that the intimacy of virus-host interactions should cause a virus to
evolve strong performance on its current host, and that mutations allowing emergence on a new
host should reduce performance on the old host. But this presumption assumes that emergence
mutations tend to be antagonistically pleiotropic: Mutations governing infection in the novel host
are assumed to compromise performance in the original host. Because P3 mutations in phage
ϕ6 allow range expansion (incorporation of new species in the host repertoire), we could gauge
whether ability to emerge on a new host tended to reduce ability to grow on the original host.
Consistent with the untested assumption, most (7 of 10) mutations allowing emergence led to
530
Wasik· Turner
Changes may still occur before final publication online and in print

MI67CH25-Turner
ARI
19 June 2013
8:14
Fitness: the ability of
an individual variant to
survive and/or
reproduce, relative to
other variants in the
population
Cheater:
an individual in the
population that
interacts with others to
gain a relative fitness
advantage at the
others’ expense
significantly poorer growth on the original host species; however, these data also indicated that
antagonistic pleiotropy was not universal, because 3 of the emergence mutations were cost free
on the original host (31). Clearly, there are emergence mutations that strongly reduce (31, 83) or
even eliminate (29) growth on the original host. Nonetheless, these results are intriguing because
they challenge the paradigm that viruses must forego strong performance across host types as they
emerge; rather, they may experience mutations that expand host range at no cost. This finding
should motivate studies of fitness consequences of emergence alleles in viruses of eukaryotes, such
as those that infect humans and other mammals.
Genetic variation in a population can also be generated through sex: the process of exchanging
genetic material between individuals, which creates new combinations of alleles. In viruses, sex
can occur through classic recombination (breaking and joining of homologous nucleic acid) or
through reassortment (swapping of chromosome segments between segmented RNA viruses to
create new combinations) (77). Similar to influenza A virus and other segmented viruses, phage
ϕ6 contains multiple segments per particle (86). This property allows phage ϕ6 genotypes that
coinfect the same host cell to undergo reassortment, a process that produces hybrid genotypes
containing mixtures of the three segments that were present in each coinfecting parent virus
(38, 79). Phage ϕ6 is in the viral family Cystoviridae, and phylogeography studies involving natural
populations of these viruses show that genetic variation generated through reassortment rivals or
exceeds that generated through mutation alone (59, 71). Thus, reassortment is a key component
of Cystoviridae biology, and the genetic variation generated through this process may play an
important role in the adaptation of these viruses.
We used lab experiments to examine whether reassortment creates useful genetic variation in
populations of phage ϕ6, allowing these populations to adapt faster than viral populations evolving
through mutation alone (80). Classic ideas on the evolutionary advantage of sex assert that sex is
common in natural populations because the additional genetic variation allows sexual populations
to adapt faster than their asexual counterparts (34, 55, 84). We controlled the presence and absence
of sex (reassortment) in phage ϕ6 populations by manipulating whether treatment populations
experienced high versus low multiplicity of infection (MOI; ratio of viruses to cells); high MOI
increasestheprobabilitythatmultiplevirusescoinfectthesamehostcellandundergoreassortment,
whereas low MOI allows mostly clonal (single-virus) infection of each host cell (79). When viruses
were challenged to further adapt to their typical P. syringae pv. phaseolicola hosts, high-MOI
lineages unexpectedly evolved more slowly than low-MOI lineages did (80), contrary to the classic
prediction. This outcome was explained by viral specialization to MOI conditions, whereby high-
MOI evolved lineages adapted to perform better under coinfection, which traded off with their
general ability to grow well under clonal conditions (78–81). In particular, the evolved high-MOI
viruses became cheaters that benefited from using intracellular products created by other viruses
during coinfection, but this selfish strategy entailed less efficient production of resources when
the cheaters infected cells on their own (79). These results are compelling because they indicate
that the consequences of evolved specialization to one portion of the niche (i.e., coinfection) may
override the possible generalized benefits of variation generated through viral sex. It is important
to note that although sexual processes such as reassortment may occasionally produce beneficial
variation for an evolving population, segmentation might have originally evolved for a purpose
other than promoting adaptation. In particular, segmentation might have evolved to promote
efficient packaging of the RNA virus genome (52), perhaps making it unlikely to observe an
advantage of sex consistent with classic evolution-of-sex hypotheses (84).
One goal of the study of evolutionary biology is to make it a more predictive science. A prime
example is the virus emergence problem, for which our efforts to date are largely reactive rather
than proactive. If we could better predict which viral genotypes or species will successfully emerge
www.annualreviews.org • On the Biological Success of Viruses
531
Changes may still occur before final publication online and in print

MI67CH25-Turner
ARI
19 June 2013
8:14
in a host population such as humans, we could proactively prepare for inevitable pandemics similar
to the current AIDS crisis caused by HIV emergence. We are a long way from accurately predicting
emergence events in viral evolution (57), but recent experiments have made inroads.
To test emergence predictions, we used experiments with VSV, which is naturally transmitted
between mammalian hosts via arthropod vectors. VSV is easily grown on a wide variety of cell types
in laboratory tissue culture. We first used VSV to select for viral lineages that were specialized in
usingasinglehost type(versus generalizedin usingmultiplehost types) (66,82).Wethen harnessed
this collection of viral lineages to test a popular idea in predictions of disease emergence. This idea
asserts that pathogens that are already capable of infecting multiple hosts should pose a greater
threat to emerge on new hosts such as humans (16, 75), consistent with the classic notion that
resource generalization is advantageous under resource uncertainty (72). We thus predicted that
the lineages selected for host-use generalization would be advantaged when challenged to grow
on a battery of new hosts, compared with their more specialized counterparts. Results confirmed
that direct selection for host breadth fostered successful emergence on novel hosts, as assessed by
measures of average growth (titer) on new hosts and estimates of variance in growth across host
types (85). These results speak to predictions in evolutionary biology, suggesting that thorough
knowledge of existing pathogen niche breadth (admittedly difficult information to obtain) would
help identify which pathogen types are best poised to undergo host shifts.
Are Viruses More Evolvable than Cellular Life?
Despite their interesting caveats, evolution experiments with viruses clearly show the capacity
of viruses to adapt successfully to environmental change. But are viruses more adaptable than
cellular organisms? From the standpoint of the variation that drives natural selection, some viruses
have greater access to potentially beneficial mutations simply because they mutate more often.
Comparative estimates of mutation rates show that RNA and single-stranded DNA viruses mutate
more readily than other evolving systems, owing to their error-prone replication and lack of
proofreading to correct spontaneous mistakes in copying genetic material (28, 30). This indicates
an inherent advantage for RNA and single-stranded DNA viruses when selection sorts through
individual variants to find a possibly better match to current environmental challenges. Of course,
this variation is not guaranteed to produce the needed adaptation, for several reasons. First, a
particular variation may be useless in the face of particular challenges, indicating a constraint for
natural selection to proceed. Second, natural selection can only proceed efficiently at sufficiently
large population sizes (12); otherwise, genetic drift will be a more important force in evolution,
and high mutation rate can create a mutational load that causes a viral population to decline
in fitness rather than improve (15). Third, viruses tend to have smaller genome sizes and less
genetic redundancy than cellular organisms, and therefore they possess less material that could be
genetically modified through selection. Finally, a high mutation rate could be a liability if an error
threshold exists, whereby the population thrives at the brink of error catastrophe (19), experiencing
too many mutations per unit time (with the expectation that most mutations are deleterious as
opposed to beneficial or neutral). Perhaps this brink of existence is most important if a population
has reached equilibrium in a constant environment, making any nonneutral mutation a liability,
but we argued above that viruses probably rarely if ever experience truly static environments.
Still, many nonviral evolving populations face some of these same obstacles to selection, and
available evidence strongly suggests that the higher mutation rate of some viruses creates an
adaptive advantage. Anecdotally, this may explain why RNA viruses seem to emerge in new host
species more often than other microbes do, despite being rarer in the biosphere. However, we
must be careful in drawing this conclusion, because our view is skewed toward disease emergence
532
Wasik· Turner
Changes may still occur before final publication online and in print

MI67CH25-Turner
ARI
19 June 2013
8:14
Genetic robustness:
phenotypic constancy
despite underlying
genetic change
in humans. For unknown reasons, we humans may be more susceptible to emergence by RNA
viruses, whereas other hosts may not; only time-consuming and expensive surveillance of a wide
variety of hosts could evaluate this possibility.
Evolvability is an intriguing process that extends beyond mere adaptation, because it involves
the evolution of evolution itself; in theory, organisms might be molded by natural selection to be
advantaged in their capacity to selectively adapt to future environmental changes. Although this
process seems plausible, it is difficult to conceive how organisms can be naturally selected to better
perform in environments they have never before encountered, especially because the prevailing
notion is that evolution is blind—that is, it does not proceed toward some future goal (20, 72).
There is abundant mathematical theory on evolvability (88), but only recently have experiments
rigorously addressed this process, and the majority of studies used experimental evolution of
microbes (13, 49). Indeed, some of these experiments demonstrate that lineages can differ in their
evolvability, gaining a relative advantage over other populations when challenged to adapt to
environmental change. However, proof of the underlying mechanism(s) that drive evolvability
remains mostly elusive. Here we focus on the prediction that evolved robustness is a mechanism
that can drive evolvability.
Genetic robustness is defined as phenotypic constancy despite underlying genetic change (24).
If a mutation changes a phenotype, we consider the gene or, more broadly, the genome, to be
relatively nonrobust, or brittle, against mutational input. However, if a genome changes but
phenotype remains unaffected, the genome is considered genetically robust.
If robustness affects evolvability, it should impact the ability of organisms to access evolutionary
innovations. Robustness allows for easier accumulation of mutations that are neutral in the current
environment; if the habitat changes, this robust genetic architecture may then promote access to
a greater number of mutations that are beneficial for adaptation (87). For example, a robust
population may be envisioned as residing in a region of a fitness landscape that is relatively flat,
owing to the high proportion of resident genotypes in the population that are equal (neutral)
in fitness (92). This creates a large neutral network of genotypes that can efficiently traverse the
landscape through random drift, due to their high degree of network connectivity. If environmental
change alters the fitness landscape, a robust population may experience an evolvability advantage
because newly arising mutations occur in a wider diversity of genetic backgrounds, creating more-
varied epistatic combinations that may prove beneficial for adaptation (40).
We studied the influence of robustness on evolvability using an empirical system in which rel-
atively robust and brittle genotypes had been identified (53) and viruses were strongly selected to
adapt to harsh environmental conditions (49). First, we identified a fundamental difference between
populations of phage ϕ6 that had evolved at high versus low MOI (80). At high MOI, the viruses
experienced complementation, a general mechanism by which viral genotypes of lower fitness
can phenotypically profit from intracellular proteins made by coinfecting viruses of higher fit-
ness (38). This complementation during coinfection should automatically buffer viral phenotypes
against mutations. Thus, complementation offered a built-in mutational buffering mechanism in
coinfecting viral lineages, which may have weakened selection for the viruses to maintain their
individual-level robustness. This de-evolution of robustness should cause the high-MOI lineages
to be more susceptible to phenotypic effects of mutational change than their low-MOI evolved
counterparts are. That is, the high-MOI viruses should be brittle to mutational input, whereas
the low-MOI populations should be robust. We proved that the lineages had evolved differing
robustness by isolating clones at random from each treatment group and using them to found new
lineages evolved under mutation accumulation. This process consisted of passage through ex-
treme daily bottlenecks (plaque-to-plaque transfers) in which drift overwhelms selection because
the small population size causes spontaneous mutations (most of them deleterious) to fix at random
www.annualreviews.org • On the Biological Success of Viruses
533
Changes may still occur before final publication online and in print

MI67CH25-Turner
ARI
19 June 2013
8:14
60
b
a
50
40
30
Thermal incubation
(5 min at 45°C)
20
10
Mean change in percent
survival after evolution
0
Lysate
High-density
growth/harvest
Robust lineages
Brittle lineages
50 generations
Figure 4
(a) Design for an evolution experiment in which phage lineages were selected to withstand damaging effects of heat shock. A phage ϕ6
lysate was exposed to 45◦C incubation for 5 min, and a dilution of the surviving progeny was plated on a lawn of Pseudomonas syringae
pv. phaseolicola bacteria. Overnight plaque formation at 25◦C corresponded to 5 generations of phage evolution. The plaques were
then harvested, and the process was repeated for 10 days (equivalent to 50 phage generations). (b) Robust viruses are advantaged in
evolvability of thermotolerance. Mean change in percent survival after selection with heat shock (45◦C) is greater for viral lineages
founded by 12 robust strains (blue circles) than for lineages initiated by 12 brittle strains (red circles). All populations were subjected to
10 days (50 generations) of periodic heat shocks. The solid line is the grand mean for the group, and dashed lines are 95% confidence
intervals. Both panels adapted with permission from Reference 50.
(15). The fitness effects of randomly accumulated mutations were greater and more variable in
lineages founded by previously high-MOI evolved viruses, indicating that these lineages were less
able to withstand the deleterious effects of mutations and confirming the prediction that they had
evolved lowered robustness (53).
To determine whether robustness promoted evolvability, we studied adaptation of robust and
brittle phage ϕ6 strains in an environment where viruses would be strongly selected to overcome
harsh environmental conditions. The virus is normally cultured at 25◦C, but when exposed to heat
shock, such as 45◦C for 5 min, roughly 80% of viral particles lose the capacity to productively infect
bacteria (57, 58), owing to the poor stability of the phage lytic enzyme at high temperature (26). We
allowed lineages founded by robust and brittle viruses to evolve on P. syringae pv. phaseolicola at
25◦C, with periodic (every fifth generation) exposure to 45◦C heat shock (49). Then we measured
mean percent survival at 45◦C for each founding clone and its derived endpoint population, to
estimate the change in percent survival after 50 generations of selection to resist damaging heat
shock. Results showed that the lineages founded by robust genotypes were more evolvable: They
experienced greater adaptation (increase in percent survival) by the end of the study (Figure 4).
Apparently, some difference in genetic architecture between the robust and brittle viral strains
allows the robust viruses to more easily innovate in the face of heat shock. The exact mechanism for
the robustness-evolvability link in phage ϕ6 has not been fully elucidated but most likely concerns
the P5 lytic enzyme, because mutations in this protein are beneficial for thermotolerance (26) and
presumably also function to buffer mutational effects elsewhere in the genome.
More work is needed to study generalized links between robustness and evolvability in viruses
and in other biological systems, as few of these kinds of studies have been attempted to date (9, 17,
70). Equally compelling is exploration of evolvability differences among groups of organisms, such
534
Wasik· Turner
Changes may still occur before final publication online and in print

MI67CH25-Turner
ARI
19 June 2013
8:14
as testing whether viruses as a group are more evolvable than cellular life. Although intriguing, it
is unclear how these experiments could be adequately designed and tested. The properties of even
closely related organisms are different enough that it is difficult to compare their evolvability in the
face of the same challenge; ideally, they would have identical mutation rates, genetic architectures,
physiologies, etc. Clearly, this would not be the case when comparing viruses with any other type
of organism. Rather, we could seek indirect evidence for evolvability differences among major
or minor groups of organisms. One possibility would be to determine whether species in the
respective groups tend to survive for different periods of geologic time, as tested when comparing
average rates of extinction between groups.
Can Viruses Better Avoid Extinction?
Extinction seems to be the ultimate fate of most species that have appeared on Earth; on the basis
of the fossil record, it is estimated that well over 99.99% of all macroscopic species have gone
extinct and that the average duration of their existence is roughly 10 million years (65). These are
distinctly sobering statistics for humans to contemplate as a species! How long have viruses been
present on Earth? The evolutionary origin of viruses is a hotly debated subject, but some ideas
posit that viruses predate cellular life (61). For example, the widespread observation that viruses
sometimes contain genes nonhomologous to known cellular life suggests that these are remnants
of an ancient viral world, arguing against the notion that viruses originate by reductively splitting
off from cellular genomes (43). Confirmation of this “virus first” claim would firmly conclude that
viruses better avoid extinction than cellular organisms; perhaps they were here first and remain to
this day.
But we cannot easily rely on the fossil record to test extinction hypotheses comparing viruses
with nonviral life, because viruses and other microscopic, soft-bodied organisms are less prone to
fossilization and therefore cannot be found in the fossil record. However, we might usefully begin
by examiningproperties of viruses aloneand asking whether viruses possess certain traits that would
aid their extinction avoidance. Above, we described how viruses might be especially vulnerable to
ecological traps (25). One possibility is that viral binding affinities could be traits resulting from
selection to avoid improper environments; even if binding properties did not originally evolve
for this purpose, they may indirectly function in this way. For example, viral coreceptors might
function in this capacity. Selection for viral attachment to a primary cellular receptor would foster
interaction with presumably suitable (permissive) host cells, whereas selection for a secondary
coreceptor would increase the probability that the exact correct match is made. The evolution
of phages that have short and long tail fibers with separate binding affinities may exemplify this
phenomenon. In certain T-even phages, long tail fibers probe the cell surface to function in
initial, reversible binding, whereas short tail fibers attach to additional coreceptors that function
in irreversible binding (67). It would be intriguing to examine primary versus secondary binding
affinities of viruses from a wide variety of viral families, to test the general hypothesis that viruses
show less-specific primary binding and more-specific secondary binding.
Finally, it is compelling to consider whether viruses better avoid extinction by losing their
individuality altogether. The Human Genome Project and other sequencing efforts reveal that
virus-derived genes are exceedingly common in the genomes of single-celled and multicellular life.
This genome incorporation is largely considered to be accidental, as is the case with transduction,
in which phage genes are recombined into bacterial genomes, seemingly as mistakes, during the
infection process. This loss of individuality seems like a clearly bad outcome from the standpoint of
individual autonomy. But the perspective may differ if we consider selection acting at levels below
the individual; from a selfish gene standpoint (21), perhaps we can view the widespread occurrence
www.annualreviews.org • On the Biological Success of Viruses
535
Changes may still occur before final publication online and in print

MI67CH25-Turner
ARI
19 June 2013
8:14
of virus-gene incorporation as being positively driven by selection, at least some of the time, rather
than purely accidental in all cases. Arguably, viruses are not very autonomous anyway. As stated
above, viruses seem to be the evolutionary champions of harnessing other organisms to do their
work, relying entirely on their hosts’ ATP generation. If a viral gene is the target of selection,
rather than the virus itself, it could conceivably be pushed by selection to become a gene or a suite
of genes contained within host genomes. Of course, this is a tenuous outcome, because selection
acting on the host may result in these genes being co-opted entirely for host functions, causing the
virus-derived gene to lose all virus-like properties. But this selfish gene–like process may explain
the widespread success of polydnaviruses, which are arguably actually virus-like particles (rather
than true viruses) that deliver expressed parasitoid-wasp genes into insect larvae to allow the wasp
progeny to complete their life cycles by warding off antiparasitoid immunity (90). We are only
beginning to appreciate the widespread occurrence of virus-derived genes in host genomes, and
it is intriguing to surmise that these events may occur due to positive selection on viral genes to
lose their viral autonomy.
CONCLUSION
The evidence we put forth in this article emphasizes that viruses are biologically successful, and
arguably more successful than cellular life, according to the many and varied metrics we examine.
The expected consequence of this apparent success is that viruses should have far-ranging effects
on other organisms in the biosphere. Organisms do not live in an ecological vacuum, meaning that
abundant and biodiverse entities should tend to widely ecologically interact with other inhabitants
of the biosphere, having pervasive effects on the biological world. Indeed, viruses are ecologically
interactive by necessity because they must rely on metabolizing hosts to complete their life cycles.
Moreover, the impact of viruses on other organisms is obvious, at levels ranging from the genome
to the ecosystem. Genome sequencing efforts show that virus-derived genes are commonly found
in the genomes of other viruses and of cellular organisms. As sequencing efforts continue to expand
the catalog of fully sequenced host-species genomes and to characterize newly identified viral
genes/genomes in sequence databases, our understanding of this genome-level impact will only
increase. The importance of virus-derived genes in macroevolution can be profound, evidenced by
the evolution of placental mammals (of which humans are a member), which contain an assimilated
retroviral gene, syncytin, that is essential for placental morphogenesis (51). As a consequence
of often antagonistic virus-host interactions, molecular mechanisms have evolved that function
in repelling viral attacks, including CRISPR/Cas systems, small-interfering RNAs, and cellular
apoptosis, as well as cytokines, interferons, and Toll-like receptors, which function in antiviral
immunity. Although evolved virus-host mutualism is possible (68), the infamous role of viruses
in disease and pandemics shows their widespread adverse effects on hosts across the biosphere;
human examples include the current HIV/AIDS crisis, the 1918 flu pandemic, and the decimation
of Native American populations by smallpox introduced by European colonists.
We can confidently state that viruses have long interacted with cellular life, and they might
have even originated before evolution of the cell. This dynamic between viruses and host species is
certain to continue as natural selection pushes viruses to evolve varied and novel means to exploit
cellular life across the biosphere. Viruses incidentally meet other organisms in their environments,
and anthropogenic changes to habitats will increase these chance encounters, sometimes creating
opportunistic emergence of viruses into humans and other hosts. Even if most of these events
do not result in viral spread, their frequency and the latent adaptive potential of viruses ensure
that the evolution of new virus-host interactions is inevitable (see Reference 44 for a discussion
of the multiple independent evolutionary origins of HIV from simian immunodeficiency virus in
536
Wasik· Turner
Changes may still occur before final publication online and in print

MI67CH25-Turner
ARI
19 June 2013
8:14
humans). But what would be the fate of viruses in a postcellular world? Mass extinctions of cellular
life due to ecosystem-wide environmental catastrophes are not without precedent (65). Would
the inherent evolvability of viruses rescue them in the absence of cellular organisms, marking
a successful return to the purported virus-first world that may have predated cells? We leave
you with this last question to ponder, indicating an obvious weak link in the chain of otherwise
overwhelming biological success of viruses.
SUMMARY POINTS
1. Viruses are arguably the most successful of all evolving entities on the planet.
2. Viral success is evident from greater numerical abundance and biodiversity that rivals
that of cellular life.
3. Viruses grow more efficiently than cellular life does, because they exclusively harness
host energy for viral replication rather than generating the energy themselves.
4. Viruses show a strong capacity to adapt despite often facing biotic and abiotic changes
in their environments, at all levels of biological organization.
5. Natural selection allows viruses to readily adapt to new conditions, but this adaptation
may trade off with performance in prior or alternative environments.
6. Elevated mutation rates and genetic robustness may provide evolvability advantages in
viruses that are not experienced by cellular life.
7. The biological success of viruses is consequential for cellular life, profoundly impacting
host genomes and populations as well as entire ecosystems.
8. Viruses may be more ancient than cellular life, and they seem poised for further success
as evolution proceeds into the future on our planet.
FUTURE ISSUES
1. Increased natural sampling of viruses is necessary to better understand the complete
virosphere (viral diversity on Earth) and to truly gauge the extent of viral success.
2. A greater understanding is needed of the mechanisms of viral adaptation, particularly in
response to large-scale ecosystem changes such as global warming.
3. Functional mechanistic drivers of evolvability can be rigorously studied in viruses but
remain poorly understood to date.
4. Resolving the evolutionary origins of viruses and relatedness among viral families would
aid understanding of the role they play in the larger evolutionary history of the biosphere.
DISCLOSURE STATEMENT
The authors are not aware of any affiliations, memberships, funding, or financial holdings that
might be perceived as affecting the objectivity of this review.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by US National Science Foundation grant DEB-10-21243 to P.E.T.
www.annualreviews.org • On the Biological Success of Viruses
537
Changes may still occur before final publication online and in print

MI67CH25-Turner
ARI
19 June 2013
8:14
LITERATURE CITED
1. Ahmed M, Lyles DS. 1998. Effect of vesicular stomatitis virus matrix protein on transcription directed by
host RNA polymerases I, II, and III. J. Virol. 72:8413–19
2. Alto BW, Wasik BR, Morales NM, Turner PE. 2013. Stochastic temperatures impede RNA virus adap-
tation. Evolution 67:969–79
3. Baccam P, Beauchemin C, Macken CA, Hayden FG, Perelson AS. 2006. Kinetics of influenza A virus
infection in humans. J. Virol. 80:7590–99
4. Baltimore D. 1971. Expression of animal virus genomes. Bacteriol. Rev. 35:235–41
5. Balvay L, Soto Rifo R, Ricci EP, Decimo D, Ohlmann T. 2009. Structural and functional diversity of viral
IRESes. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1789:542–57
6. Bamford DH. 2003. Do viruses form lineages across different domains of life? Res. Microbiol. 154:231–36
7. Bergh O, Borsheim KY, Bratbak G, Heldal M. 1989. High abundance of viruses found in aquatic envi-
ronments. Nature 340:467–68
8. Black BL, Rhodes RB, McKenzie M, Lyles DS. 1993. The role of vesicular stomatitis virus matrix protein
in inhibition of host-directed gene expression is genetically separable from its function in virus assembly.
J. Virol. 67:4814–21
9. Bloom JD, Labthavikul ST, Otey CR, Arnold FH. 2006. Protein stability promotes evolvability.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 103:5869–74
10. Bolduc B, Shaughnessy DP, Wolf YI, Koonin EV, Roberto FF, Young M. 2012. Identification of novel
positive-strand RNA viruses by metagenomic analysis of archaea-dominated Yellowstone hot springs.
J. Virol. 86:5562–73
11. Brouns SJ, Jore MM, Lundgren M, Westra ER, Slijkhuis RJ, et al. 2008. Small CRISPR RNAs guide
antiviral defense in prokaryotes. Science 321:960–64
12. Burch CL, Chao L. 1999. Evolution by small steps and rugged landscapes in the RNA virus ϕ6. Genetics
151:921–27
13. Burch CL, Chao L. 2000. Evolvability of an RNA virus is determined by its mutational neighbourhood.
Nature 406:625–28
14. Cantalupo PG, Calgua B, Zhao G, Hundesa A, Wier AD, et al. 2011. Raw sewage harbors diverse viral
populations. mBio 2:e00180–11
15. Chao L. 1990. Fitness of RNA virus decreased by Muller’s ratchet. Nature 348:454–55
16. Cleaveland S, Laurenson MK, Taylor LH. 2001. Diseases of humans and their domestic mammals:
pathogen characteristics, host range and the risk of emergence. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B Biol. Sci.
356:991–99
17. Codoner FM, Daros JA, Sole RV, Elena SF. 2006. The fittest versus the flattest: experimental confirmation
of the quasispecies effect with subviral pathogens. PLoS Pathog. 2:e136
18. Cracraft J, Donoghue MJ, eds. 2004. Assembling the Tree of Life. New York: Oxford Univ. Press. 576 pp.
19. Crotty S, Cameron CE, Andino R. 2001. RNA virus error catastrophe: direct molecular test by using
ribavirin. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 98:6895–900
20. Darwin C. 1859. On the Origin of Species by Means of Natural Selection. London: John Murray. 502 pp.
21. Dawkins R. 1976. The Selfish Gene. Oxford, UK: Oxford Univ. Press. 224 pp.
22. de Groot RJ, Hardy WR, Shirako Y, Strauss JH. 1990. Cleavage-site preferences of Sindbis virus polypro-
teins containing the non-structural proteinase. Evidence for temporal regulation of polyprotein processing
in vivo. EMBO J. 9:2631–38
23. De Paepe M, Taddei F. 2006. Viruses’ life history: towards a mechanistic basis of a trade-off between
survival and reproduction among phages. PLoS Biol. 4:e193
24. de Visser JAGM, Hermisson J, Wagner GP, Meyers LA, Bagheri HC, et al. 2003. Perspective: evolution
and detection of genetic robustness. Evolution 57:1959–72
25. Dennehy JJ, Friedenberg NA, Yang YW, Turner PE. 2007. Virus population extinction via ecological
traps. Ecol. Lett. 10:230–40
26. Dessau M, Goldhill D, McBride RL, Turner PE, Modis Y. 2012. Selective pressure causes an RNA virus
to trade reproductive fitness for increased structural and thermal stability of a viral enzyme. PLoS Genet.
8:e1003102
538
Wasik· Turner
Changes may still occur before final publication online and in print

MI67CH25-Turner
ARI
19 June 2013
8:14
27. Diemer GS, Stedman KM. 2012. A novel virus genome discovered in an extreme environment suggests
recombination between unrelated groups of RNA and DNA viruses. Biol. Direct 7:13
28. Drake JW, Charlesworth B, Charlesworth D, Crow JF. 1998. Rates of spontaneous mutation. Genetics
148:1667–86
29. Duffy S, Burch CL, Turner PE. 2007. Evolution of host specificity drives reproductive isolation among
RNA viruses. Evolution 61:2614–22
30. Duffy S, Shackelton LA, Holmes EC. 2008. Rates of evolutionary change in viruses: patterns and deter-
minants. Nat. Rev. Genet. 9:267–76
31. Duffy S, Turner PE, Burch CL. 2006. Pleiotropic costs of niche expansion in the RNA bacteriophage
ϕ6. Genetics 172:751–57
32. Estes MK, Graham DY, Smith EM, Gerba CP. 1979. Rotavirus stability and inactivation. J. Gen. Virol.
43:403–9
33. Fauquet CM, Mayo MA, Maniloff J, Desselberger U, Ball LA, eds. 2005. Virus Taxonomy: Eighth Report
of the International Committee on Taxonomy of Viruses. San Diego, CA: Elsevier
34. Fisher RA. 1930. The Genetical Theory of Natural Selection. Oxford, UK: Clarendon. 272 pp.
35. Fitch WM, Leiter JM, Li XQ, Palese P. 1991. Positive Darwinian evolution in human influenza A viruses.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 88:4270–74
36. Flint SJ, Enquist LW, Racaniello VR, Skalka AM. 2009. Principles of Virology, Vols. 1, 2. Washington,
DC: ASM Press. 569 pp. 419 pp. 3rd ed.
37. Freeman S, Herron JC. 2003. Evolutionary Analysis. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson Prentice Hall. 3rd
ed.
38. Froissart R, Wilke CO, Montville R, Remold SK, Chao L, Turner PE. 2004. Co-infection weakens
selection against epistatic mutations in RNA viruses. Genetics 168:9–19
39. Hendrix RW. 2002. Bacteriophages: evolution of the majority. Theor. Popul. Biol. 61:471–80
40. Huynen MA, Stadler PF, Fontana W. 1996. Smoothness within ruggedness: the role of neutrality in
adaptation. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 93:397–401
41. Johnson ZI, Chisholm SW. 2004. Properties of overlapping genes are conserved across microbial genomes.
Genome Res. 14:2268–72
42. Jones KE, Patel NG, Levy MA, Storeygard A, Balk D, et al. 2008. Global trends in emerging infectious
diseases. Nature 451:990–93
43. Koonin EV, Senkevich TG, Dolja VV. 2006. The ancient virus world and evolution of cells. Biol. Direct
1:29
44. Korber B, Muldoon M, Theiler J, Gao F, Gupta R, et al. 2000. Timing the ancestor of the HIV-1 pandemic
strains. Science 288:1789–96
45. Kovacs EJ, Palmer JL, Fortin CF, Fulop T Jr, Goldstein DR, Linton PJ. 2009. Aging and innate immunity
in the mouse: impact of intrinsic and extrinsic factors. Trends Immunol. 30:319–24
46. Lemm JA, Rice CM. 1993. Roles of nonstructural polyproteins and cleavage products in regulating Sindbis
virus RNA replication and transcription. J. Virol. 67:1916–26
47. Levins R. 1968. Evolution in Changing Environments: Some Theoretical Explorations. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
Univ. Press. 132 pp.
48. Marston MF, Pierciey FJ Jr, Shepard A, Gearin G, Qi J, et al. 2012. Rapid diversification of coevolving
marine Synechococcus and a virus. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 109:4544–49
49. McBride RC, Ogbunugafor CB, Turner PE. 2008. Robustness promotes evolvability of thermotolerance
in an RNA virus. BMC Evol. Biol. 8:231
50. McBride RC, Turner PE. 2008. Genetic robustness and evolvability of viruses. Microbe 3:409–15
51. Mi S, Lee X, Li X, Veldman GM, Finnerty H, et al. 2000. Syncytin is a captive retroviral envelope protein
involved in human placental morphogenesis. Nature 403:785–89
52. Mindich L. 2004. Packaging, replication and recombination of the segmented genome of bacteriophage
ϕ6 and its relatives. Virus Res. 101:83–92
53. Montville R, Froissart R, Remold SK, Tenaillon O, Turner PE. 2005. Evolution of mutational robustness
in an RNA virus. PLoS Biol. 3:e381
54. Morse SS. 1995. Factors in the emergence of infectious diseases. Emerg. Infect. Dis. 1:7–15
www.annualreviews.org • On the Biological Success of Viruses
539
Changes may still occur before final publication online and in print

MI67CH25-Turner
ARI
19 June 2013
8:14
55. Muller HJ. 1932. Some genetic aspects of sex. Am. Nat. 66:118–38
56. Ogbunugafor CB, Alto BW, Overton TO, Bhushan A, Morales NM, Turner PE. 2013. Evolution of
increased survival in RNA viruses specialized on cancer-derived cells. Am. Nat. 181(5):585–95
57. Ogbunugafor CB, Basu S, Morales NM, Turner PE. 2010. Combining mathematics and empirical data
to predict emergence of RNA viruses that differ in reservoir use. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B Biol. Sci.
365:1919–30
58. Ogbunugafor CB, McBride RC, Turner PE. 2009. Predicting virus evolution: the relationship between
genetic robustness and evolvability of thermotolerance. Cold Spring Harb. Symp. Quant. Biol. 74:109–18
59. O’Keefe KJ, Silander OK, McCreery H, Weinreich DM, Wright KM, et al. 2010. Geographic differences
in sexual reassortment in RNA phage. Evolution 64:3010–23
60. Pina M, Bize A, Forterre P, Prangishvili D. 2011. The archeoviruses. FEMS Microbiol. Rev. 35:1035–54
61. Prangishvili D, Forterre P, Garrett RA. 2006. Viruses of the Archaea: a unifying view. Nat. Rev. Microbiol.
4:837–48
62. Price PW. 1980. Evolutionary Biology of Parasites. Princeton, NJ: Princeton Univ. Press. 237 pp.
63. Raoult D, Audic S, Robert C, Abergel C, Renesto P, et al. 2004. The 1.2-megabase genome sequence of
Mimivirus. Science 306:1344–50
64. Raoult D, Forterre P. 2008. Redefining viruses: lessons from Mimivirus. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 6:315–19
65. Raup DM. 1994. The role of extinction in evolution. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 91:6758–63
66. Remold SK, Rambaut A, Turner PE. 2008. Evolutionary genomics of host adaptation in vesicular stom-
atitis virus. Mol. Biol. Evol. 25:1138–47
67. Riede I. 1987. Receptor specificity of the short tail fibres (gp12) of T-even type Escherichia coli phages.
Mol. Gen. Genet. 206:110–15
68. Roossinck MJ. 2011. The good viruses: viral mutualistic symbioses. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 9:99–108
69. Rubach JK, Wasik BR, Rupp JC, Kuhn RJ, Hardy RW, Smith JL. 2009. Characterization of purified
Sindbis virus nsP4 RNA-dependent RNA polymerase activity in vitro. Virology 384:201–8
70. Sanju´an R, Cuevas JM, Furi´o V, Holmes EC, Moya A. 2007. Selection for robustness in mutagenized
RNA viruses. PLoS Genet. 3:e93
71. Silander OK, Weinreich DM, Wright KM, O’Keefe KJ, Rang CU, et al. 2005. Widespread genetic
exchange among terrestrial bacteriophages. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 102:19009–14
72. Simpson GG. 1944. Tempo and Mode in Evolution. New York: Columbia Univ. Press. 237 pp.
73. Strauss JH, Strauss EG. 1994. The alphaviruses: gene expression, replication, and evolution. Microbiol.
Rev. 58:491–562
74. Suttle CA. 2007. Marine viruses—major players in the global ecosystem. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 5:801–12
75. Taylor LH, Latham SM, Woolhouse ME. 2001. Risk factors for human disease emergence. Philos. Trans.
R. Soc. Lond. B Biol. Sci. 356:983–89
76. Thal MA, Wasik BR, Posto J, Hardy RW. 2007. Template requirements for recognition and copying by
Sindbis virus RNA-dependent RNA polymerase. Virology 358:221–32
77. Turner PE. 2003. Searching for the advantages of virus sex. Orig. Life Evol. Biosph. 33:95–108
78. Turner PE. 2005. Parasitism between co-infecting bacteriophages. Adv. Ecol. Res. 37:309–32
79. Turner PE, Burch CL, Hanley KA, Chao L. 1999. Hybrid frequencies confirm limit to coinfection in the
RNA bacteriophage ϕ6. J. Virol. 73:2420–24
80. Turner PE, Chao L. 1998. Sex and the evolution of intrahost competition in RNA virus ϕ6. Genetics
150:523–32
81. Turner PE, Chao L. 2003. Escape from Prisoner’s Dilemma in RNA phage ϕ6. Am. Nat. 161:497–505
82. Turner PE, Elena SF. 2000. Cost of host radiation in an RNA virus. Genetics 156:1465–70
83. Turner PE, McBride RC, Duffy S, Montville R, Wang LS, et al. 2012. Evolutionary genomics of host-use
in bifurcating demes of RNA virus ϕ6. BMC Evol. Biol. 12:153
84. Turner PE, McBride RC, Zeyl CW. 2009. Sexual exploits in experimental evolution. In Experimental
Evolution: Concepts, Methods and Applications of Selection Experiments, ed. T Garland, MR Rose, pp. 479–
521. Berkeley: Univ. Calif. Press
85. Turner PE, Morales NM, Alto BW, Remold SK. 2010. Role of evolved host breadth in the initial emer-
gence of an RNA virus. Evolution 64:3273–86
540
Wasik· Turner
Changes may still occur before final publication online and in print

MI67CH25-Turner
ARI
19 June 2013
8:14
86. Vidaver AK, Koski RK, Van Etten JL. 1973. Bacteriophage ϕ6: a lipid-containing virus of Pseudomonas
phaseolicola. J. Virol. 11:799–805
87. Wagner A. 2005. Robustness and Evolvability in Living Systems. Princeton, NJ: Princeton Univ. Press.
367 pp.
88. Wagner A, Altenberg L. 1996. Perspective: complex adaptations and the evolution of evolvability. Evolution
50:967–76
89. Walsh D, Mohr I. 2011. Viral subversion of the host protein synthesis machinery. Nat. Rev. Microbiol.
9:860–75
90. Whitfield JB. 2002. Estimating the age of the polydnavirus/braconid wasp symbiosis. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
USA 99:7508–13
91. Whitman WB, Coleman DC, Wiebe WJ. 1998. Prokaryotes: the unseen majority. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
USA 95:6578–83
92. Wilke CO, Wang JL, Ofria C, Lenski RE, Adami C. 2001. Evolution of digital organisms at high mutation
rates leads to survival of the flattest. Nature 412:331–33
93. Wolfe ND, Switzer WM, Carr JK, Bhullar VB, Shanmugam V, et al. 2004. Naturally acquired simian
retrovirus infections in central African hunters. Lancet 363:932–37
www.annualreviews.org • On the Biological Success of Viruses
541
Changes may still occur before final publication online and in print

