We believe, based on a study conducted at the request of the Committee by an independent consultant, that these metrics are highly correlated with long-term stockholder value creation.
Semler Brossy:
For purposes of determining the 2014 compensation of Messrs. Klappa and Keyes, and Ms. Martin, the term  market median  means the median level for an executive officer serving in a comparable position in a comparably sized company to WEC in general industry based on our analysis of the Towers Watson survey data.
As shown in the table above, based on the most recently available fiscal year end data, as provided by CAP, our revenue is at the 25th percentile while net income and market capitalization exceeded the median.
The O&CC, with the assistance of CAP, reviews the competitiveness of the NEOs  LTIP grants, as measured against the peer group, using reported Topic 718 grant values and approves grants to the NEOs accordingly as reported above in Long-Term Incentive.
Based on information provided by our compensation consultant, we believe that these arrangements are common practice and align our executive officer interests with those of our stockholders by enabling our executive officers to consider corporate transactions that are in the best interest of stockholders without undue concern over whether the transactions may jeopardize their continued employment.
(FWC) to advise it on executive compensation matters.
The awards are designed with the independent compensation consultant s advice on maximizing retention value through features such as cliff vesting and an active service requirement for vesting.
Consistent with recommendations from Aon Hewitt and current market and peer company practices, the Compensation Committee has approved and the Company has entered into change-in- control severance agreements with the named executive officers and certain other executive officers that provide for payments of no more than three-times base pay plus target annual bonus for the CEO and two-times base pay plus target annual bonus for other executive officers and which do not provide for any tax  gross up  payments to executives.
Annualized values for long-term stock compensation as determined by our compensation consultant are based on the fair value at grant of awards annualized over the triennial award cycle for performance shares and stock options and over the vesting terms for restricted stock.
Annualized values for long-term stock compensation are based on the fair value at grant of awards, annualized over the three-year award cycle for performance shares and options, and over the vesting terms for restricted stock, based on data provided by our compensation consultant.
The Compensation Committee approved the two times severance multiplier after consulting with its advisors and reviewing the severance provided by peer companies.
The Severance Plan provisions were developed based on a comparison of severance benefits typically available at the NEO Peer Group companies, in consultation with F.W.
We also determined that we needed to better explain market-leveraged stock units (MSUs), the new equity award vehicle adopted by the Committee based on the expert advice and recommendation of its independent compensation consultant, Towers Watson.