The qualitative portion of the NEOs  bonuses was based on the Compensation Committee s determination of their level of achievement in contributing to the overall management of Comcast, including the continuing management of Comcast Cable (for all NEOs other than Mr. Burke) and NBCUniversal (for all NEOs other than Mr. Smit) and the continuing focus on critical diversity and customer service metrics.
Due to factors like this that are outside of our control, our executive compensation program seeks to provide rewards that balance financial and operating criteria and total shareholder return, and align with longer-term value creation, to promote sustainability, financial health and stockholder value over the longer term.
Therefore, short-term performance pay is based on achievement of the Company s operational and financial performance goals, with one-third determined by operational performance, such as safety, reliability, and customer satisfaction; one-third determined by business unit financial performance; and one-third determined by EPS performance.
Increased emphasis on performance in health, environment, safety and security ( HESS ) by strengthening the degree to which it impacts bonus payouts.
Based on its review of these factors, the Compensation Committees approved adjustments to each brand s Brand Operating Income for fiscal 2014 to take into account the effects of ship impairments, gains and losses on ship sales, restructuring expenses and HESS performance.
As a result of the inclusion of the $90 million of incremental costs and $102 million cost of the proposed settlement in the calculation of the payouts for the named executive officers due to the Dan River incident and related costs, the EPS payout was reduced from 120% to 78.33% of target and the O&M payout was reduced from 93% to 0% of target.
During 2014, adjusted net earnings from our clean energy investments contributed $104.6 million to net earnings, 56% more than during 2013
Mr. Howell continued to implement and maintain expense savings initiatives critical to expanding our adjusted EBITDAC margin, played an important role in the successful execution and financing of our acquisition program (including the acquisition of Giles Insurance Broking Group in November 2013) and successfully managed our tax-advantaged (clean energy) investments.
Increase earnings contribution from clean-energy investments by 15-20% (earnings contribution increased 56%)
The Compensation Committee evaluates individual performance based on metrics related to an individual s contribution to PepsiCo s strategic business imperatives, such as improving operating efficiencies, driving sustainable innovation, increasing customer satisfaction and managing and developing a diverse and talented workforce.
Continued the use of both shorter-term financial measures and critical operational measure, such as safety and guest and employee engagement, in our annual incentive program
The HRC may adjust or eliminate incentive compensation awards, regardless of achieving applicable financial performance goals or individual qualitative objectives, if the HRC determines that a named executive has failed to comply with our Code of Ethics and Business Conduct or with our policies on information security, regulatory compliance, and risk management or does not meet qualitative individual performance goals related to diversity and inclusion.
Performance under our short-term incentive program is evaluated and rewarded based on two components: one for Operating Earnings and one for Operational Excellence (which includes cost control and safety measures).
Our clinical performance measure for the 2015 STI program has been further refined to use catheter rates instead of mortality for company-wide executives and Kidney Care division executives, given the inherent delay in the nature of the calculation of mortality, which can create ambiguities in the calculation if it has to be performed by the time of payment of performance-based cash bonuses.
The Compensation Committee also acknowledged Mr. Moonves' successes in management development and human resources, including his involvement in acquiring key executive and creative talent, his execution of the Company's succession planning and diversity programs and his leadership in fostering a remarkably stable senior management team.
Consequently, the incentive opportunities for Messrs. Kettering and Hamrock were subject to achievement with respect to the corporate financial measures (net operating earnings per share and corporate funds from operations), and achievement with respect to performance measures tied to the business unit net operating earnings (net of interest expense and income taxes) and business unit funds from operations and business unit safety measures for which they have responsibility.
Some of the elements we consider when designing compensation policies include attrition, diversity, and executive development needs.
Through our philanthropic programs and the efforts of our employees and advisors, in 2014 we donated $12 million and 66,000 volunteer hours in support of more than 6,000 nonprofits
We have an executive charged with intensive engagement on non-financial and non-operating issues important to our shareholders, including governance, environment, safety, and sustainability
Executive compensation payouts are also tied to the ethical standards of the Company.
Recognized HSE industry leader.
The amounts earned by each executive are reflected in the  Summary Compensation Table  on page 45 under the columns entitled  Non-Equity Incentive Plan Compensation  (reflecting the payout of the financial, operation and safety metrics) and  Bonus  (reflecting the payout of the environmental and social responsibility metric).